GPCRs continue to be among the leading class of protein targets for drug development.

At the leading edge of this area is a need to understand previously poorly-characterized GPCRs that are the primary targets for controlled and prohibited substances, namely cannabinoids, and psychedelics.

As the control status, legality, and medical access to cannabis and psychedelics
continue to shift research is desperately needed to understand the potential
harms and therapeutic utility of cannabinoids and psychedelics.

In addition, the opportunity to develop allosteric ligands that target the
cannabinoid receptor in particular may represent a means to bypass the
undesirable effects of orthosteric ligands.

The long-term hypothesis of this research is that the cannabinoid and serotonin
receptors are tractable therapeutic targets for the development of drugs for
unmet clinical needs including pain, epilepsy, and anxiety.

To this end, the overall objective of this research is to advance knowledge of
these receptorsâ€™ fundamental structure-activity relationships through the use of
in vitro and in silico computer modelling assays performed on CB1R, CB2R, and
5-HT2AR.

The aims of this research were to understand (1) The SAR between compounds that
separately bind CB1R, CB2R and 5-HT2AR; (2) How this SAR can be used to
elucidate biased agonism at CB1R, CB2R and 5- HT2AR; and (3) How computational
methodologies can be employed to explain pharmacological properties of these
compounds.

Each chapter in this thesis represents work already published or under peer
review.

Although methodologies and approaches overlap between each individual study all
methods have been included in order to illustrate key differences in technique
and approach.

Chapter 2 shows that enantiomerically separated compounds display a difference
in pharmacology and binding sites on CB1R.

Chapter 3 builds upon chapter 2 and shows that computational modelling can be
used to 21 optimize ligands that bind to the CB1R ago-PAM site.

Chapter 4 characterizes select synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonists at CB1R
and CB2R.

Chapter 5 characterizes NBOMe compounds at 5-HT2AR looking at the relationship
in vitro and in silico of changing methoxy groups on the phenethylamine ring.

Lastly chapter 6 summarizes the research provided and looks at philosophical
considerations regarding this research.

