1. FEBS Lett. 1996 Dec 2;398(2-3):253-8. doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(96)01160-x.

Characterization of a human gene related to genes encoding somatostatin 
receptors.

Kolakowski LF Jr(1), Jung BP, Nguyen T, Johnson MP, Lynch KR, Cheng R, Heng HH, 
George SR, O'Dowd BF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Texas Health Science Center at San 
Antonio, 78284, USA.

We report the identification of a gene, named SLC-1(1), encoding a novel G 
protein-coupled receptor (GPCR). A customized search procedure of a database of 
expressed sequence tags (dbEST) retrieved a human cDNA sequence that partially 
encoded a GPCR. A genomic DNA fragment identical to the cDNA was obtained and 
used to screen a library to isolate the full-length coding region of the gene. 
This gene was intronless in its open reading frame, and encoded a receptor of 
402 amino acids, and shared -40% amino acid identity in the transmembrane (TM) 
regions to the five known human somatostatin receptors. Northern blot analysis 
revealed that SLC-1 is expressed in human brain regions, including the forebrain 
and hypothalamus. Expression in the rat was highest in brain, followed by heart, 
kidney, and ovary. Expression of SLC-1 in COS-7 cells failed to show specific 
binding to radiolabelled Tyr1-somatostatin-14, naloxone, bremazocine, 
1,3-di(2-tolyl)-guanidine (DTG), or haloperidol. A repeat polymorphism of the 
form (CA)n was discovered in the 5'-untranslated region (UTR) of the gene and 
SLC-1 was mapped to chromosome 22, q13.3.

DOI: 10.1016/s0014-5793(96)01160-x
PMID: 8977118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997 Jan 3;230(1):69-72. doi: 
10.1006/bbrc.1996.5828.

Discovery of a novel human G protein-coupled receptor gene (GPR25) located on 
chromosome 1.

Jung BP(1), Nguyen T, Kolakowski LF Jr, Lynch KR, Heng HH, George SR, O'Dowd BF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

We amplified human genomic DNA by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using 
oligonucleotides based on the primary sequence of the genes encoding the 
somatostatin receptors (SSTR) and the somatostatin-like receptor gene SLC-1. One 
resultant DNA fragment was used to screen a genomic DNA library resulting in the 
isolation of a gene, GPR25, encoding an additional member of the G 
protein-coupled receptor family (GPCR). GPR25 is intronless throughout its open 
reading frame (ORF) and encodes a protein of 360 amino acids. The receptor 
encoded by GPR25 shares highest identity to the receptor encoded by GPR15, 
angiotensin II type 1A receptor, and somatostatin receptor 5. Northern analysis 
found no transcripts expressed in liver or any of the 12 brain regions analyzed. 
Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis localized GPR25 to chromosome 
1q32.1.

DOI: 10.1006/bbrc.1996.5828
PMID: 9020062 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1998 Feb 4;1401(2):216-20. doi: 
10.1016/s0167-4889(97)00135-3.

Cloning of the rat brain cDNA encoding for the SLC-1 G protein-coupled receptor 
reveals the presence of an intron in the gene.

Lakaye B(1), Minet A, Zorzi W, Grisar T.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neurochemistry University of Liège, Belgium. B.Lakaye@ulg.ac.be

In order to isolate new G protein-coupled receptors expressed in the cerebral 
cortex, a set of degenerate oligonucleotides corresponding to the third and 
seventh transmembrane segment were synthetized. Their use in PCR on rat brain 
cortex mRNA amplified several cDNA fragments. One of them, a 526 bp sequence, 
encoded for what was at that time an unknown G protein-coupled receptor. An 
oligonucleotide derived from the sequence was then used as a probe to isolate 
the receptor cDNA from a rat brain cDNA library. It encodes for a 353aa protein 
with seven transmembrane segments, three consensus N-glycosylation sites at the 
amino terminus and several potential phosphorylation sites in the intracellular 
loops. This protein shares 91% overall identity with a recently cloned human 
somatostatin-like receptor of 402aa named SLC-1. This suggests that we have 
cloned the rat orthologue of the human SLC-1. However, the extracellular 
N-terminus of the human receptor is 49 amino acids longer and shows 50% identity 
with the rat one. Because the human sequence was deduced from genomic DNA, we 
suspected the presence of an intron in the gene. This was confirmed by PCR using 
primers spanning the intron. On the basis of the sequence of a 128 kb fragment 
of chromosome 22 encompassing the SLC-1 gene, we were able to deduce a corrected 
amino acids sequence for the human receptor. So both rat and human SLC-1 
receptors are 353aa long, with three consensus N-glycosylation sites. They share 
96% identity at the amino acid level and are encoded by a gene containing one 
intron in the coding sequence.

DOI: 10.1016/s0167-4889(97)00135-3
PMID: 9531978 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Nature. 1999 Jul 15;400(6741):261-5. doi: 10.1038/22313.

Melanin-concentrating hormone is the cognate ligand for the orphan 
G-protein-coupled receptor SLC-1.

Chambers J(1), Ames RS, Bergsma D, Muir A, Fitzgerald LR, Hervieu G, Dytko GM, 
Foley JJ, Martin J, Liu WS, Park J, Ellis C, Ganguly S, Konchar S, Cluderay J, 
Leslie R, Wilson S, Sarau HM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Screening Technologies, New Frontiers Science Park, 
SmithKline Beecham Pharmaceuticals, Harlow, Essex, UK. Jon_Chambers-1@sbphrd.com

The underlying causes of obesity are poorly understood but probably involve 
complex interactions between many neurotransmitter and neuropeptide systems 
involved in the regulation of food intake and energy balance. Three pieces of 
evidence indicate that the neuropeptide melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is 
an important component of this system. First, MCH stimulates feeding when 
injected directly into rat brains; second, the messenger RNA for the MCH 
precursor is upregulated in the hypothalamus of genetically obese mice and in 
fasted animals; and third, mice lacking MCH eat less and are lean. MCH 
antagonists might, therefore, provide a treatment for obesity. However, the 
development of such molecules has been hampered because the identity of the MCH 
receptor has been unknown until now. Here we show that the 353-amino-acid human 
orphan G-protein-coupled receptor SLC-1 expressed in HEK293 cells binds MCH with 
sub-nanomolar affinity, and is stimulated by MCH to mobilize intracellular Ca2+ 
and reduce forskolin-elevated cyclic AMP levels. We also show that SLC-1 
messenger RNA and protein is expressed in the ventromedial and dorsomedial 
nuclei of the hypothalamus, consistent with a role for SLC-1 in mediating the 
effects of MCH on feeding.

DOI: 10.1038/22313
PMID: 10421367 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Nature. 1999 Jul 15;400(6741):265-9. doi: 10.1038/22321.

Molecular characterization of the melanin-concentrating-hormone receptor.

Saito Y(1), Nothacker HP, Wang Z, Lin SH, Leslie F, Civelli O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of California, Irvine 92697-4625, USA.

Orphan G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are cloned proteins with structural 
characteristics common to the GPCRs but that bind unidentified ligands. Orphan 
GPCRs have been used as targets to identify novel transmitter molecules. Here we 
describe the isolation from brain extracts and the characterization of the 
natural ligand of a particular orphan GPCR (SLC-1) that is sequentially 
homologous to the somatostatin receptors. We show that the natural ligand of 
this receptor is the neuropeptide melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH). MCH is a 
cyclic peptide that regulates a variety of functions in the mammalian brain, in 
particular feeding behaviour. We demonstrate that nanomolar concentrations of 
MCH strongly activate SLC-1-related pathways through G(alpha)i and/or G(alpha)q 
proteins. We have analysed the tissue localization of the MCH receptor and find 
that it is expressed in several brain regions, in particular those involved in 
olfactory learning and reinforcement mechanisms, indicating that therapies 
targeting the MCH receptor should act on the neuronal regulation of food 
consumption.

DOI: 10.1038/22321
PMID: 10421368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Aug 11;261(3):622-6. doi: 
10.1006/bbrc.1999.1104.

Isolation and identification of melanin-concentrating hormone as the endogenous 
ligand of the SLC-1 receptor.

Shimomura Y(1), Mori M, Sugo T, Ishibashi Y, Abe M, Kurokawa T, Onda H, 
Nishimura O, Sumino Y, Fujino M.

Author information:
(1)Pharmaceutical Discovery Research Division, Takeda Chemical Industries, Ltd., 
Wadai 10, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 300-4293, Japan.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH), which is an orexigenic peptide, was 
isolated and identified as the endogenous ligand of the SLC-1 receptor. We 
established a CHO cell line expressing the rat SLC-1 receptor to search for its 
endogenous ligand. The extract of rat whole brain showed inhibition of 
intracellular forskolin-induced cAMP accumulation in rat SLC-1-expressing CHO 
cells and was purified. Using HPLC purification, we isolated and identified MCH 
as the endogenous ligand of the SLC-1 receptor. The authentic MCH demonstrated a 
dose-dependent inhibitory effect on cAMP accumulation in forskolin-stimulated 
rat and human SLC-1-expressing CHO cells with an EC(50) value of 0.2 nM for both 
the rat and human SLC-1 receptors. This is the first description of the 
functional receptor for MCH.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/bbrc.1999.1104
PMID: 10441476 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. FEBS Lett. 1999 Sep 3;457(3):522-4. doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(99)01092-3.

Identification of melanin concentrating hormone (MCH) as the natural ligand for 
the orphan somatostatin-like receptor 1 (SLC-1).

Bächner D(1), Kreienkamp H, Weise C, Buck F, Richter D.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Zellbiochemie und klinische Neurobiologie, Universität Hamburg, 
Martinistrasse 52, 20246, Hamburg, Germany.

To identify possible ligands of the orphan somatostatin-like receptor 1 (SLC-1), 
rat brain extracts were analyzed by using the functional expression system of 
Xenopus oocytes injected with cRNAs encoding SLC-1 and G protein-gated inwardly 
rectifying potassium channels (GIRK). A strong inward current was observed with 
crude rat brain extracts which upon further purification by cation exchange 
chromatography and high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) yielded two 
peptides with a high agonist activity. Mass spectrometry and partial peptide 
sequencing revealed that one peptide is identical with the neuropeptide melanin 
concentrating hormone (MCH), the other represents a truncated version of MCH 
lacking the three N-terminal amino acid residues. Xenopus oocytes expressing the 
MCH receptor responded to nM concentrations of synthetic MCH not only by the 
activation of GIRK-mediated currents but also by the induction of Ca(2+) 
dependent chloride currents mediated by phospholipase C. This indicates that the 
MCH receptor can couple either to the G(i)- or G(q)-mediated signal transduction 
pathway, suggesting that MCH may serve for a number of distinct brain functions 
including food uptake behavior.

DOI: 10.1016/s0014-5793(99)01092-3
PMID: 10471841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Nat Cell Biol. 1999 Sep;1(5):267-71. doi: 10.1038/12978.

The receptor for the orexigenic peptide melanin-concentrating hormone is a 
G-protein-coupled receptor.

Lembo PM(1), Grazzini E, Cao J, Hubatsch DA, Pelletier M, Hoffert C, St-Onge S, 
Pou C, Labrecque J, Groblewski T, O'Donnell D, Payza K, Ahmad S, Walker P.

Author information:
(1)AstraZeneca R&D Montréal, Quebec, Canada.

Gene-knockout studies of melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) and its effect on 
feeding and energy balance have firmly established MCH as an orexigenic 
(appetite-stimulating) peptide hormone. Here we identify MCH as the ligand for 
the orphan receptor SLC-1. The rat SLC-1 is activated by nanomolar 
concentrations of MCH and is coupled to the G protein G alpha i/o. The pattern 
of SLC-1 messenger RNA expression coincides with the distribution of 
MCH-containing nerve terminals and is consistent with the known central effects 
of MCH. Our identification of an MCH receptor could have implications for the 
development of new anti-obesity therapies.

DOI: 10.1038/12978
PMID: 10559938 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Eur J Neurosci. 2000 Apr;12(4):1194-216. doi:
10.1046/j.1460-9568.2000.00008.x.

The distribution of the mRNA and protein products of the melanin-concentrating 
hormone (MCH) receptor gene, slc-1, in the central nervous system of the rat.

Hervieu GJ(1), Cluderay JE, Harrison D, Meakin J, Maycox P, Nasir S, Leslie RA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, SmithKline Beecham Pharmaceuticals, Third Avenue, 
Harlow, Essex, UK. Guillaume_Hervieu-1@sbphrd.com

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH), a 19 amino acid cyclic peptide, is largely 
expressed in the hypothalamus. It is implicated in the control of general 
arousal and goal-orientated behaviours in mammals, and appears to be a key 
messenger in the regulation of food intake. An understanding of the biological 
actions of MCH has been so far hampered by the lack of information about its 
receptor(s) and their location in the brain. We recently identified the orphan 
G-protein-coupled receptor SLC-1 as a receptor for the neuropeptide MCH. We used 
in situ hybridization histochemistry and immunohistochemistry to determine the 
distribution of SLC-1 mRNA and its protein product in the rat brain and spinal 
cord. SLC-1 mRNA and protein were found to be widely and strongly expressed 
throughout the brain. Immunoreactivity was observed in areas that largely 
overlapped with regions mapping positive for mRNA. SLC-1 signals were observed 
in the cerebral cortex, caudate-putamen, hippocampal formation, amygdala, 
hypothalamus and thalamus, as well as in various nuclei of the mesencephalon and 
rhombencephalon. The distribution of the receptor mRNA and immunolabelling was 
in good general agreement with the previously reported distribution of MCH 
itself. Our data are consistent with the known biological effects of MCH in the 
brain, e.g. modulation of the stress response, sexual behaviour, anxiety, 
learning, seizure production, grooming and sensory gating, and with a role for 
SLC-1 in mediating these physiological actions.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1460-9568.2000.00008.x
PMID: 10762350 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Diabetes. 2000 Jul;49(7):1073-7. doi: 10.2337/diabetes.49.7.1073.

Melanin-concentrating hormone regulates leptin synthesis and secretion in rat 
adipocytes.

Bradley RL(1), Kokkotou EG, Maratos-Flier E, Cheatham B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Obesity is a common problem in Western society and is associated with 
significant morbidity and mortality. Energy homeostasis is regulated by a 
complex system involving both peripheral signals such as leptin and a number of 
orexigenic and anorectic neuropeptides. Obesity can result from dysregulation of 
the peripheral and/or central signals. Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a 
hypothalamic peptide that is important in the regulation of feeding behavior, 
primarily via uncharacterized signaling pathways in the central nervous system. 
Leptin, expressed in adipose tissue, mediates some of its actions through 
several hypothalamic neuropeptides, notably agouti-related peptide, 
proopiomelanocortin, and neuropeptide Y. Expression of leptin is regulated by 
dietary status, insulin, and glucocorticoids. Furthermore, certain neuropeptides 
may act on adipocytes. However, the potential effect of MCH has not been 
investigated. We report that MCH stimulates leptin mRNA expression and leptin 
secretion. MCH stimulated a 2-fold increase in leptin secretion by isolated rat 
adipocytes after 4 h of treatment. This increase in secreted leptin was preceded 
by a rapid and transient increase in ob mRNA levels; MCH stimulated a 2.5-fold 
increase in ob mRNA within 1 h of treatment, followed by a decline to basal 
levels within 4 h. In addition, we demonstrate that the MCH receptor SLC-1 is 
expressed in adipocytes, suggesting that fat cells may be targets of MCH or an 
MCH-like peptide under physiological conditions. Finally, using a 
radioimmunoassay, MCH/MCH-like peptide was detected in rat plasma. This study 
establishes a novel in vitro mammalian system for examining MCH signaling 
pathways.

DOI: 10.2337/diabetes.49.7.1073
PMID: 10909960 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2001 Jan;42(1):206-9.

Expression of the melanin-concentrating hormone receptor in porcine and human 
ciliary epithelial cells.

Hintermann E(1), Erb C, Talke-Messerer C, Liu R, Tanner H, Flammer J, Eberle AN.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Endocrinology, Department of Research, University Eye Clinic, 
University Hospital and University Children's Hospital, Basel, Switzerland.

PURPOSE: To evaluate whether the receptors for melanin-concentrating hormone 
(MCH) and its functional antagonist alpha-melanocyte-stimulating hormone 
(alpha-MSH) are expressed in the ciliary epithelium. Furthermore, to examine 
whether MCH, a neuropeptide involved in fluid and electrolyte homeostasis, may 
influence ion flux mediated by Na,K (adenosine triphosphatase)-ATPase in a 
ciliary epithelial cell line.
METHODS: Expression of MCH receptors (MCH-R) and alpha-MSH receptors (MSH-R) on 
primary porcine ciliary pigmented epithelial (PE) cells and on a human 
nonpigmented ciliary epithelial (NPE) cell line, ODM-2 was investigated by 
radioligand binding studies and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction 
(RT-PCR). The MCH-R was further characterized by photocrosslinking. Influence of 
MCH on Na, K-ATPase activity was evaluated by an Rb(+) transport assay.
RESULTS: MCH-R expression was observed at both the mRNA and protein levels in PE 
and NPE cells. In contrast, MSH-Rs were not detectable. At the mRNA level, 
expression of slc-1 was shown and with crosslinking, a 44-kDa protein was 
labeled. MCH showed no effect on Na,K-ATPase activity of NPE cells.
CONCLUSIONS: The presence of MCH-R in ciliary epithelial cells of both human and 
porcine origin but the absence of MSH-Rs indicates that in these cells, MCH and 
alpha-MSH do not form a functionally antagonistic hormonal pair as they do in 
several other systems. Although effects of MCH on intestinal water and ion 
transport have been documented, a direct control of Na,K-ATPase activity was not 
detected in human NPE cells in vitro.

PMID: 11133869 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Endocrinology. 2001 Feb;142(2):680-6. doi: 10.1210/endo.142.2.7981.

Melanin-concentrating hormone receptor is a target of leptin action in the mouse 
brain.

Kokkotou EG(1), Tritos NA, Mastaitis JW, Slieker L, Maratos-Flier E.

Author information:
(1)Joslin Diabetes Center and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 
02215, USA.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a hypothalamic neuropeptide that is 
important in the regulation of energy homeostasis. MCH signals via a 
seven-transmembrane G protein-coupled receptor, which is coupled to Galpha(i). 
This receptor was initially cloned in rat and human and designated SLC-1 because 
of its homology to the somatostatin receptor. In rat brain, it is expressed in a 
pattern that mirrors the previously described pattern of projections of 
MCH-immunoreactive fibers. In the present study we cloned the mouse MCH receptor 
(MCH-R) ortholog by a rapid amplification of 5'- and 3'-cDNA ends approach and 
have found it to be 98% homologous with the rat sequence. We have characterized 
MCH-R messenger RNA distribution in the mouse brain by in situ hybridization and 
have shown MCH-R to be expressed in diverse brain areas implicated in the 
regulation of feeding, body adiposity, and sensory integration of smell and 
gustatory inputs, including the hypothalamus [paraventricular nucleus 
(magnocellular part) and dorsomedial, ventromedial, and arcuate nucleus], areas 
of the olfactory pathway, and the nucleus of the solitary tract. We also studied 
MCH-R regulation and found that MCH-R expression is increased 7-fold by 48-h 
fasting or genetic leptin deficiency (ob/ob mice) and is completely blunted by 
leptin administration. In contrast, MCH-R messenger RNA expression remains 
unaltered in genetic MCH deficiency. Our findings suggest that MCH-R constitutes 
a central target of leptin action in the mammalian brain.

DOI: 10.1210/endo.142.2.7981
PMID: 11159839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Seikagaku. 2001 Jan;73(1):38-42.

[Finding partner for orexigenic peptide--the receptor for melanin-concentrating 
hormone (MCH) is a G protein-coupled receptor].

[Article in Japanese]

Saito Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical 
Science, 3-18-22 Hon-Komagome, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8613.

PMID: 11244741 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Biol Chem. 2001 Apr 27;276(17):13554-62. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M010727200. Epub 
2001 Jan 18.

Structure-activity relationship studies of melanin-concentrating hormone 
(MCH)-related peptide ligands at SLC-1, the human MCH receptor.

Audinot V(1), Beauverger P, Lahaye C, Suply T, Rodriguez M, Ouvry C, Lamamy V, 
Imbert J, Rique H, Nahon JL, Galizzi JP, Canet E, Levens N, Fauchere JL, Boutin 
JA.

Author information:
(1)Division de Pharmacologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Institut de Recherches 
SERVIER, 78290-Croissy sur Seine, France.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a cyclic nonadecapeptide involved in the 
regulation of feeding behavior, which acts through a G protein-coupled receptor 
(SLC-1) inhibiting adenylcyclase activity. In this study, 57 analogues of MCH 
were investigated on the recently cloned human MCH receptor stably expressed in 
HEK293 cells, on both the inhibition of forskolin-stimulated cAMP production and 
guanosine-5'-O-(3-[(35)S]thiotriphosphate ([(35)S]- GTPgammaS) binding. The 
dodecapeptide MCH-(6-17) (MCH ring between Cys(7) and Cys(16), with a single 
extra amino acid at the N terminus (Arg(6)) and at the C terminus (Trp(17))) was 
found to be the minimal sequence required for a full and potent agonistic 
response on cAMP formation and [(35)S]- GTPgammaS binding. We Ala-scanned this 
dodecapeptide and found that only 3 of 8 amino acids of the ring, namely Met(8), 
Arg(11), and Tyr(13), were essential to elicit full and potent responses in both 
tests. Deletions inside the ring led either to inactivity or to poor antagonists 
with potencies in the micromolar range. Cys(7) and Cys(16) were substituted by 
Asp and Lys or one of their analogues, in an attempt to replace the disulfide 
bridge by an amide bond. However, those modifications were deleterious for 
agonistic activity. In [(35)S]- GTPgammaS binding, these compounds behaved as 
weak antagonists (K(B) 1-4 microm). Finally, substitution in MCH-(6-17) of 6 out 
of 12 amino acids by non-natural residues and concomitant replacement of the 
disulfide bond by an amide bond led to three compounds with potent antagonistic 
properties (K(B) = 0.1-0.2 microm). Exploitation of these structure-activity 
relationships should open the way to the design of short and stable MCH peptide 
antagonists.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M010727200
PMID: 11278733 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 May 25;283(5):1013-8. doi: 
10.1006/bbrc.2001.4893.

Cloning of a novel G protein-coupled receptor, SLT, a subtype of the 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptor.

Mori M(1), Harada M, Terao Y, Sugo T, Watanabe T, Shimomura Y, Abe M, Shintani 
Y, Onda H, Nishimura O, Fujino M.

Author information:
(1)Discovery Research Laboratories I, Pharmaceutical Research Division, Takeda 
Chemical Industries, Ltd., Wadai 10, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 300-4293, Japan. 
Mori_Masaaski@takeda.co.jp

A DNA fragment encoding an amino acid sequence possessing common features to the 
G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) superfamily was found in the human genomic 
sequence, and from this information, the full-length cDNA of a novel GPCR, 
designated SLT, was cloned from the human hippocampus cDNA library. SLT showed 
the highest homology to the melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) receptor, SLC-1 
(31.5% identity), and to a lesser extent, to the somatostatin (SST) receptor 
subtypes. MCH exhibited agonistic behavior when applied to the SLT-expressing 
CHO cells at subnanomolar doses whereas more than 200 known peptides, including 
SST and cortistatin, did not. These results indicated that MCH is the cognate 
ligand of the SLT receptor and that this newly cloned GPCR is the second subtype 
of the MCH receptor. Quantitative polymerase chain reaction analysis of the SLT 
gene expression in human tissues showed that the SLT receptor is expressed 
mainly in brain areas including the cerebral cortex, amygdala, hippocampus, and 
corpus callosum, as well as in a limited number of peripheral tissues. The 
distribution of the SLT nearly overlapped that of SLC-1, suggesting that some of 
the neural functions of MCH may be mediated by both of these receptor subtypes.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/bbrc.2001.4893
PMID: 11355873 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Jun 19;98(13):7576-81. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.131200698.

Identification and characterization of a melanin-concentrating hormone receptor.

An S(1), Cutler G, Zhao JJ, Huang SG, Tian H, Li W, Liang L, Rich M, Bakleh A, 
Du J, Chen JL, Dai K.

Author information:
(1)Tularik, Inc., Two Corporate Drive, South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH), a neuropeptide expressed in central and 
peripheral nervous systems, plays an important role in the control of feeding 
behaviors and energy metabolism. An orphan G protein-coupled receptor 
(SLC-1/GPR24) has recently been identified as a receptor for MCH (MCHR1). We 
report here the identification and characterization of a G protein-coupled 
receptor as the MCH receptor subtype 2 (MCHR2). MCHR2 has higher protein 
sequence homology to MCHR1 than any other G protein-coupled receptor. The 
expression of MCHR2 has been detected in many regions of the brain. In contrast 
to MCHR1, which is intronless in the coding region and is located at the 
chromosomal locus 22q13.3, the MCHR2 gene has multiple exons and is mapped to 
locus 6q21. MCHR2 is specifically activated by nanomolar concentrations of MCH, 
binds to MCH with high affinity, and signals through Gq protein. This discovery 
is important for a full understanding of MCH biology and the development of 
potential therapeutics for diseases involving MCH, including obesity.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.131200698
PMCID: PMC34710
PMID: 11416225 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Biol Chem. 2001 Sep 14;276(37):34664-70. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M102601200. Epub 
2001 Jul 17.

Identification and pharmacological characterization of a novel human 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptor, mch-r2.

Wang S(1), Behan J, O'Neill K, Weig B, Fried S, Laz T, Bayne M, Gustafson E, 
Hawes BE.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Human Genomics and Central Nervous System Biology, 
Schering-Plough Research Institute, Kenilworth, New Jersey 07033, USA.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a neuropeptide highly expressed in the 
brain that regulates several physiological functions mediated by receptors in 
the G protein-coupled receptor family. Recently an orphan receptor, SLC-1, has 
been identified as an MCH receptor (MCH-R1). Herein we identify and characterize 
a novel receptor for human MCH (MCH-R2). The receptor is composed of 340 amino 
acids encoded by a 1023-base pair cDNA and is 35% homologous to SLC-1. 
(125)I-MCH specifically bound to Chinese hamster ovary cells stably expressing 
MCH-R2. MCH stimulated dose-dependent increases in intracellular free Ca(2+) and 
inositol phosphate production in these cells but did not affect cAMP production. 
The pharmacological profile for mammalian MCH, [Phe(13),Tyr(19)]MCH, and salmon 
MCH at MCH-R2 differed compared with MCH-R1 as assessed by intracellular 
signaling and radioligand binding assays. The EC(50) in signaling assays and the 
IC(50) in radioligand binding assays of salmon MCH was an order of magnitude 
higher than mammalian MCH at MCH-R2. By comparison, the EC(50) and IC(50) values 
of salmon MCH and mammalian MCH at MCH-R1 were relatively similar. Blot 
hybridization revealed exclusive expression of MCH-R2 mRNA in several distinct 
brain regions, particularly in the cortical area, suggesting the involvement of 
MCH-R2 in the central regulation of MCH-mediated functions.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M102601200
PMID: 11459838 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2001 Oct;299(1):137-46.

SLC-1 receptor mediates effect of melanin-concentrating hormone on feeding 
behavior in rat: a structure-activity study.

Suply T(1), Della Zuana O, Audinot V, Rodriguez M, Beauverger P, Duhault J, 
Canet E, Galizzi JP, Nahon JL, Levens N, Boutin JA.

Author information:
(1)Division de Pharmacologie Moleculaire et Cellulaire, Institut de Recherches 
Servier, Croissy/Seine, France.

Several studies have shown that melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is an 
orexigenic peptide in rat. In the present study, a structure-activity 
relationship with MCH analogs was performed in rat, both in vitro and in vivo. 
On rat recombinant SLC-1 receptor, both cAMP inhibition and [(125)I]S36057 
binding were measured. In vivo, these analogs were injected 
intracerebroventricularly in rats and their effects were evaluated upon food 
intake. First, data obtained with the rat recombinant receptor were highly 
correlated with those obtained from its human counterpart. Second, agonist 
potencies in the cAMP assay were also highly correlated with binding affinities. 
These peptides could be classified into several groups according to their 
potency at the SLC-1 receptor (from subnanomolar activity to complete 
inactivity). Indeed, there was a strong correlation between their effects upon 
food intake and the results obtained at the rat SLC-1 receptor. The present 
report describes for the first time the rat SLC-1 receptor pharmacology and 
clearly establishes the relevance of the SLC-1 receptor in feeding behavior.

PMID: 11561073 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Mol Pharmacol. 2001 Oct;60(4):632-9.

Cloning and molecular characterization of the novel human melanin-concentrating 
hormone receptor MCH2.

Rodriguez M(1), Beauverger P, Naime I, Rique H, Ouvry C, Souchaud S, Dromaint S, 
Nagel N, Suply T, Audinot V, Boutin JA, Galizzi JP.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Recherches Servier, Division de Pharmacologie Moléculaire et 
Cellulaire, Croissy sur Seine, France.

Using a genomics-based approach for screening orphan G-protein-coupled 
receptors, we have identified and cloned a novel high-affinity, 
melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) receptor. This receptor, named S643b, 
displays the greatest overall identity (32%) with the previously reported human 
SLC-1 receptor (MCH1) and to a lesser extent with the somatostatin receptor 
subtypes. The gene encoding the S643b receptor spans more than 23 kilobase pairs 
(kb) and was mapped, by radiation hybrid experiments, on chromosome 6q14.3-q15. 
Comparison of the S643b cDNA with human genomic sequence reveals that the 
340-amino-acid receptor is encoded by five exons. Its tissue distribution, as 
determined by Northern blot and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction 
analysis, indicates that a 4-kb transcript is predominantly expressed in the 
brain. When expressed in Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells, the S643b receptor 
displays a strong, dose-dependent, transient elevation of intracellular calcium 
in response to MCH (EC(50) = 9.5 nM). During the present study, we isolated a 
splice variant, designated S643a, encoding for a receptor that was not activated 
by MCH in a cellular calcium mobilization assay. Comparative pharmacological 
studies using CHO cells stably expressing either SLC-1 or S643b receptors 
demonstrated that similar structural features of MCH are required to stimulate 
intracellular Ca(2+) mobilization at both receptors. The identification and 
localization of this new MCH receptor (MCH2) provides further insight into the 
physiological implication of MCH in modulating behavioral responses, including 
food intake.

PMID: 11562423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Clin Invest. 2002 Apr;109(7):923-30. doi: 10.1172/JCI14643.

The melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1, a novel target of autoantibody 
responses in vitiligo.

Kemp EH(1), Waterman EA, Hawes BE, O'Neill K, Gottumukkala RV, Gawkrodger DJ, 
Weetman AP, Watson PF.

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical Sciences (North), University of Sheffield, Sheffield, 
United Kingdom. e.h.kemp@sheffield.ac.uk

Vitiligo is a common depigmenting disorder resulting from the loss of 
melanocytes in the skin. The pathogenesis of the disease remains obscure, 
although autoimmune mechanisms are thought to be involved. Indeed, 
autoantibodies and autoreactive T lymphocytes that target melanocytes have been 
reported in some vitiligo patients. The objective of this study was to identify 
pigment cell antigens that are recognized by autoantibodies in vitiligo. Using 
IgG from vitiligo patients to screen a melanocyte cDNA phage-display library, we 
identified the melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1) as a novel 
autoantigen related to this disorder. Immunoreactivity against the receptor was 
demonstrated in vitiligo patient sera by using radiobinding assays. Among sera 
from healthy controls and from patients with autoimmune disease, none exhibited 
immunoreactivity to MCHR1, indicating a high disease specificity for Ab's 
against the receptor. Inhibition of MCH binding to its receptor by IgG from 
vitiligo patients was also shown.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI14643
PMCID: PMC150932
PMID: 11927619 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Genomics. 2002 Jun;79(6):785-92. doi: 10.1006/geno.2002.6771.

Melanin-concentrating hormone receptor subtypes 1 and 2: species-specific gene 
expression.

Tan CP(1), Sano H, Iwaasa H, Pan J, Sailer AW, Hreniuk DL, Feighner SD, Palyha 
OC, Pong SS, Figueroa DJ, Austin CP, Jiang MM, Yu H, Ito J, Ito M, Ito M, Guan 
XM, MacNeil DJ, Kanatani A, Van der Ploeg LH, Howard AD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Obesity and Metabolic Research, Merck Research Laboratories, 
Rahway, NJ 07065, USA.

To assess the contribution of potential central nervous system pathways 
implicated in the control of appetite regulation and energy metabolism, it is 
essential to first identify appropriate animal models. Melanin-concentrating 
hormone (MCH), a conserved cyclic neuropeptide implicated in the modulation of 
food intake, has been shown to bind and activate two G-protein-coupled 
receptors, called GPR24 and MCHR2, expressed in human brain and other tissues. 
Here we show that several non-human species (rat, mouse, hamster, guinea pig, 
and rabbit) do not have functional MCHR2 receptors, or encode a nonfunctional 
MCHR2 pseudogene while retaining GPR24 expression. We identified three species 
for further evaluation that express both MCH receptor subtypes. We cloned and 
functionally characterized dog, ferret, and rhesus GPR24 and MCHR2 in mammalian 
cells and studied their brain distribution patterns by in situ hybridization. 
The homology, expression profile, and functional similarity of the receptors in 
the dog, ferret, and rhesus to that of human support the potential use of these 
species as preclinical animal models in the development of therapeutic agents 
for obesity or other MCH-mediated disorders.

(c)2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

DOI: 10.1006/geno.2002.6771
PMID: 12036292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Endocrinology. 2002 Jul;143(7):2469-77. doi: 10.1210/endo.143.7.8903.

Targeted disruption of the melanin-concentrating hormone receptor-1 results in 
hyperphagia and resistance to diet-induced obesity.

Chen Y(1), Hu C, Hsu CK, Zhang Q, Bi C, Asnicar M, Hsiung HM, Fox N, Slieker LJ, 
Yang DD, Heiman ML, Shi Y.

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Lilly Research Laboratories, Eli Lilly & Co., 
Indianapolis, Indiana 46285, USA.

The hypothalamic neuropeptide melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) has been 
implicated in a variety of physiological functions including the regulation of 
feeding and energy homeostasis. Two MCH receptors (MCHR1 and MCHR2) have been 
identified so far. To decipher the functional role of the MCH receptors, we have 
generated and phenotypically characterized mice rendered deficient in MCHR1 
expression by homologous recombination. Inactivation of MCHR1 results in mice 
(MCHR1-/-) that are resistant to diet-induced obesity. With a high-fat diet, 
body fat mass is significantly lower in both male (4.7 +/- 0.6 g vs. 9.6 +/- 1.2 
g) and female (3.9 +/- 0.2 vs. 5.8 +/- 0.5 g) MCHR1-/- mice than that of the 
wild-type control (P < 0.01), but the lean mass remains constant. When 
normalized to body weight, female mice are hyperphagic, and male mice are 
hyperphagic and hypermetabolic, compared with wild-type mice. Consistent with 
the lower fat mass, both leptin and insulin levels are significantly lower in 
male MCHR1-/- mice than in the wild-type controls. Our data firmly establish 
MCHR1 as a mediator of MCH effects on energy homeostasis and suggest that 
inactivation of MCHR1 alone is capable to counterbalance obesity induced by a 
high-fat diet.

DOI: 10.1210/endo.143.7.8903
PMID: 12072376 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


23. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2002 Aug;302(2):766-73. doi: 10.1124/jpet.302.2.766.

Appetite-boosting property of pro-melanin-concentrating hormone(131-165) 
(neuropeptide-glutamic acid-isoleucine) is associated with proteolytic 
resistance.

Maulon-Feraille L(1), Della Zuana O, Suply T, Rovere-Jovene C, Audinot V, Levens 
N, Boutin JA, Duhault J, Nahon JL.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Pharmacologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire-Centre National de la 
Recherche Scientifique, Unité Mixte de Recherche 6097, 660 route des 
Lucioles-Sophia-Antipolis, 06560 Valbonne, France.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a cyclic neuropeptide, with a major role 
in stimulation of feeding behavior in mammals. MCH signals in the brain occur 
via two seven-transmembrane G protein-coupled receptors, namely MCH1 (SLC-1, 
MCH(1), MCH-R1, or MCH-1R) and MCH2 (SLT, MCH(2), MCH-R2, or MCH-2R). In this 
study, we demonstrate that the pro-MCH(131-165) peptide neuropeptide-glutamic 
acid-isoleucine (NEI)-MCH is more potent than MCH in stimulating feeding in the 
rat. Using rat MCH1-expressed human embryonic kidney 293 cells, we show that 
NEI-MCH exhibits 5-fold less affinity in a binding assay and 2-fold less potency 
in a cAMP assay than MCH. A similar 7- to 8-fold shift in potency was observed 
in a Ca(2+)(i) assay using rat MCH1 or human MCH2-transfected Chinese hamster 
ovary cell models. This demonstrates that NEI-MCH is not a better agonist than 
MCH at either of the MCH receptors. Then, we compared the proteolysis resistance 
of MCH and NEI-MCH to rat brain membrane homogenates and purified proteases. 
Kinetics of peptide degradation using brain extracts indicated a t(1/2) of 34.8 
min for MCH and 78.5 min for NEI-MCH with a specific pattern of cleavage of MCH 
but not NEI-MCH by exo- and endo-proteases. Furthermore, MCH was found highly 
susceptible to degradation by aminopeptidase M and endopeptidase 24.11, whereas 
NEI-MCH was fully resistant to proteolysis by these enzymes. Therefore, our 
results strongly suggest that reduced susceptibility to proteases of NEI-MCH 
compared with MCH account for its enhanced activity in feeding behavior. NEI-MCH 
represents therefore the first MCH natural functional "superagonist" so far 
described.

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.302.2.766
PMID: 12130742 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2002 Sep;283(3):E584-92. doi: 
10.1152/ajpendo.00161.2002.

Melanin-concentrating hormone activates signaling pathways in 3T3-L1 adipocytes.

Bradley RL(1), Mansfield JP, Maratos-Flier E, Cheatham B.

Author information:
(1)Research Division, Joslin Diabetes Center and the Department of Medicine, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Energy homeostasis is regulated by peripheral signals, such as leptin, and by 
several orexigenic and anorectic neuropeptides. Recently, we reported that the 
orexigenic neuropeptide melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) stimulates leptin 
production by rat adipocytes and that the MCH receptor (MCH-R1) is present on 
these cells. Here, we show that MCH-R1 is present on murine 3T3-L1 adipocytes. 
Treatment of 3T3-L1 adipocytes with 1 micromolar MCH for up to 2 h acutely 
downregulated MCH-R1, indicating a mechanism of ligand-induced receptor 
downregulation. Potential signaling pathways mediating MCH-R1 action in 
adipocytes were investigated. Treatment of 3T3-L1 adipocytes with 1 micromolar 
MCH rapidly induced a threefold and a fivefold increase in p44/42 MAPK and pp70 
S6 kinase activities, respectively. In addition, 3T3-L1 adipocytes transiently 
transfected with a murine leptin-luciferase promoter construct showed a fourfold 
and a sixfold increase in leptin promoter-reporter gene expression at 1 h and 4 
h, respectively, in response to MCH. Activity decreased to basal levels at 8 h. 
Furthermore, MCH-stimulated leptin promoter-driven luciferase activity was 
diminished in the presence of the MAP/ERK kinase inhibitor PD-98059 and in the 
presence of rapamycin, an inhibitor of pp70 S6 kinase activation. These results 
provide further evidence for a functional MCH signaling pathway in adipocytes.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpendo.00161.2002
PMID: 12169453 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Aug 23;296(3):698-701. doi: 
10.1016/s0006-291x(02)00932-4.

Melanin-concentrating hormone and its receptor are expressed and functional in 
human skin.

Hoogduijn MJ(1), Ancans J, Suzuki I, Estdale S, Thody AJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Bradford, Bradford BD7 1DP, 
UK. M.Hoogduijn@bradford.ac.uk

In this study, we have demonstrated the presence of melanin-concentrating 
hormone (MCH) and melanin-concentrating hormone receptor (MCHR1) transcripts in 
human skin. Sequence analysis confirmed that the transcripts of both genes were 
identical to those previously found in human brain. In culture, endothelial 
cells showed pro-MCH expression whereas no signal was found in keratinocytes, 
melanocytes, and fibroblasts. MCHR1 expression was restricted to melanocytes and 
melanoma cells. Stimulation of cultured human melanocytes with MCH reduced the 
alpha-MSH-induced increase in cAMP production. Furthermore, the melanogenic 
actions of alpha-MSH were inhibited by MCH. We propose that the MCH/MCHR1 
signalling system is present in human skin and may have a role with the 
melanocortins in regulating the melanocyte.

DOI: 10.1016/s0006-291x(02)00932-4
PMID: 12176038 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Peptides. 2002 Aug;23(8):1401-8. doi: 10.1016/s0196-9781(02)00077-3.

Cloning and characterization of rhesus monkey MCH-R1 and MCH-R2.

Fried S(1), O'Neill K, Hawes BE.

Author information:
(1)Schering-Plough Research Institute, CNS/CV Biological Research, 2015 
Galloping Hill Road, Kenilworth, NJ 07033, USA.

Rhesus monkey MCH-R1 and MCH-R2 receptors were cloned. Amino acid homology is 
98.8% between monkey and human MCH-R1, while monkey and human MCH-R2 are 98% 
homologous. Binding and intracellular signaling characteristics of the monkey 
receptors were compared with the human homologues. The results demonstrate that 
MCH binds to the monkey MCH-R1 receptor with a K(d) of 6.5 nM and monkey MCH-R2 
with a K(d) of 2.2 nM similar to K(d) values for human MCH-R1 and MCH-R2. 
Additionally, monkey MCH-R1 couples through G(i)/G(o) and G(q)-type G proteins 
similar to human MCH-R1 whereas monkey and human MCH-R2 utilize the G(q) 
signaling pathway.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/s0196-9781(02)00077-3
PMID: 12182940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


27. FEBS Lett. 2002 Aug 28;526(1-3):124-8. doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(02)03115-0.

MIZIP, a highly conserved, vertebrate specific melanin-concentrating hormone 
receptor 1 interacting zinc-finger protein.

Bächner D(1), Kreienkamp HJ, Richter D.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Zellbiochemie und klinische Neurobiologie, Universität Hamburg, 
Martinistrasse 52, 20246, Hamburg, Germany

Using the yeast-two-hybrid system a novel protein was identified from human 
brain that interacts with the C-terminus of melanin-concentrating hormone 
receptor 1 (MCH-R1). This protein, characterized by a Myeloid translocation 
protein 8, Nervy, DEAF1 proteins (MYND) zinc-finger domain, is termed 
MCH-R1-interacting zinc-finger protein, MIZIP. It is fully conserved in man, 
rat, mouse and highly conserved in Xenopus and zebrafish, but not detectable in 
invertebrates. MIZIP gene organization in human (six exons on chromosome 9q34.3) 
and mouse is highly conserved, yet in rodents an additional exon is generated 
giving rise to alternatively spliced mRNAs. MIZIP is expressed in brain, testis 
and stomach, where expression of MCH and MCH-R1 was previously reported. MIZIP 
interaction with MCH-R1 was verified by overlay and pull-down assays as well as 
by co-transfection experiments in human embryonic kidney-293 cells. MIZIP is 
cytoplasmically localized but gets recruited to the plasma membrane when cells 
are co-transfected with MCH-R1 supporting the notion that MIZIP is involved in 
the function of MCH-R1.

DOI: 10.1016/s0014-5793(02)03115-0
PMID: 12208518 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


28. FEBS Lett. 2002 Sep 11;527(1-3):205-10. doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(02)03232-5.

Human immune cells express ppMCH mRNA and functional MCHR1 receptor.

Verlaet M(1), Adamantidis A, Coumans B, Chanas G, Zorzi W, Heinen E, Grisar T, 
Lakaye B.

Author information:
(1)Center for Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology, University of Liège, 17 place 
Delcour, B-4020, Liège, Belgium.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is highly expressed in the brain and 
modulates feeding behavior. It is also expressed in some peripheral tissues 
where its role remains unknown. We have investigated MCH function in human and 
mouse immune cells. RT-PCR analysis revealed a low expression of prepro-MCH and 
MCH receptor 1 (MCHR1) but not of MCHR2 transcript in tissular and peripheral 
blood immune cells. FACS and in vitro assay studies demonstrated that MCHR1 
receptor expression on most cell types can trigger, in the presence of MCH, cAMP 
synthesis and calcium mobilization in peripheral blood mononuclear cells 
(PBMCs). Moreover, MCH treatment decreases the CD3-stimulated PBMC proliferation 
in vitro. Accordingly, our data indicate for the first time that MCH and MCHR1 
may exert immunomodulatory functions.

DOI: 10.1016/s0014-5793(02)03232-5
PMID: 12220661 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Oct 18;298(1):54-9. doi: 
10.1016/s0006-291x(02)02400-2.

Endogenous receptor for melanin-concentrating hormone in human neuroblastoma 
Kelly cells.

Schlumberger SE(1), Jäggin V, Tanner H, Eberle AN.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Endocrinology, Department of Research (ZLF), University 
Hospital and University Children's Hospital, Hebelstrasse 20, CH-4031, Basel, 
Switzerland. Sophie.Schlumberger@free.fr

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH), a cyclic nonadecapeptide, is predominantly 
expressed in mammalian neurons located in the zona incerta and lateral 
hypothalamus. Current interest in MCH relates to its role in the control of 
feeding behaviour. Two receptors for MCH were recently found: MCH-R(1) and 
MCH-R(2). We show here by RT-PCR analysis and immunofluorescence studies that 
the human neuroblastoma cell line Kelly expresses MCH and MCH-R(1) but not 
MCH-R(2). In competition assays using 125I-labelled MCH an inhibitory 
concentration 50% (IC(50)) of 76nM was determined for MCH, indicating a high 
affinity of Kelly cells for MCH. MCH induces mitogen-activated protein kinase 
(MAPK) phosphorylation in Kelly cells but no increase in the intracellular free 
Ca(2+) concentration. This suggests that MCH signals via Galpha(i)/Galpha(0) in 
these cells. The presence and functionality of MCH-R(1) renders this neuronal 
cell a very useful model for future structure-activity studies in a 
physiological environment mimicking the human brain for the evaluation of 
potential appetite-regulating drugs.

DOI: 10.1016/s0006-291x(02)02400-2
PMID: 12379219 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Recept Signal Transduct Res. 2002 Feb-Nov;22(1-4):509-31. doi: 
10.1081/rrs-120014618.

Expression of receptors for melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) in different 
tissues and cell lines.

Schlumberger SE(1), Talke-Messerer C, Zumsteg U, Eberle AN.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Endocrinology, Department of Research (ZLF) University Hospital 
and University Children's Hospital, CH-4031 Basel, Switzerland.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a potent orexigenic neuropeptide and a 
physiological antagonist of alpha-melanocyte-stimulating hormone (alpha-MSH) in 
the brain as well as at peripheral sites, including the pigmentary systems of 
specific vertebrates. Two receptor subtypes for MCH, MCH-R1 and MCH-R2, have 
been cloned, but other receptor subtypes are likely to exist. Based on our own 
data and the current literature, we have compared the expression of different 
receptors for MCH in various mammalian cell lines and tissues. Summarizing all 
data currently available, we conclude that the two cloned MCH receptors, MCH-R1 
and MCH-R2, exhibit differences in their expression pattern, although MCH-R1 is 
generally colocalized in all tissues where MCH-R2 expression is found. It 
appears that MCH-R1 is more abundant and has a wider distribution pattern than 
MCH-R2. Other hypothetical MCH-R subtypes may be expressed in specific tissues, 
e.g., in the pigment cell system.

DOI: 10.1081/rrs-120014618
PMID: 12503638 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


31. FEBS Lett. 2003 Jan 2;533(1-3):29-34. doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(02)03744-4.

Functional role of N-linked glycosylation on the rat melanin-concentrating 
hormone receptor 1.

Saito Y(1), Tetsuka M, Yue L, Kawamura Y, Maruyama K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Saitama Medical School, 38 Moro-Hongo, 
Moroyama-cho, Iruma-gun, 350-0495, Saitama, Japan. yumisait@saitama-med.ac.jp

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is known to act through two 
G-protein-coupled receptors MCHR1 and MCHR2. MCHR1 has three potential sites 
(Asn13, Asn16 and Asn23) for N-linked glycosylation in its extracellular 
amino-terminus which may modulate its reactivity. Site-directed mutagenesis of 
the rat MCHR1 cDNA at single or multiple combinations of the three potential 
glycosylation sites was used to examine the role of the putative carbohydrate 
chains on receptor activity. It was found that all three potential N-linked 
glycosylation sites in MCHR1 were glycosylated, and that N-linked glycosylation 
of Asn23 was necessary for full activity. Furthermore, disruption of all three 
glycosylation sites impaired proper expression at the cell surface and receptor 
activity. These data outline the importance of the N-linked glycosylation of the 
MCHR1.

DOI: 10.1016/s0014-5793(02)03744-4
PMID: 12505154 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Neuroendocrinol. 2003 Mar;15(3):268-72. doi:
10.1046/j.1365-2826.2003.00997.x.

Effect of direct injection of melanin-concentrating hormone into the 
paraventricular nucleus: further evidence for a stimulatory role in the adrenal 
axis via SLC-1.

Kennedy AR(1), Todd JF, Dhillo WS, Seal LJ, Ghatei MA, O'Toole CP, Jones M, 
Witty D, Winborne K, Riley G, Hervieu G, Wilson S, Bloom SR.

Author information:
(1)Imperial Centre for Obesity Research, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College, 
London, UK.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is implicated in the control of a number of 
hormonal axes including the hypothalamic-pituitary adrenal (HPA) axis. Previous 
studies have shown that there is evidence for both a stimulatory and an 
inhibitory action on the HPA axis; therefore, we attempted to further 
characterize the effects of MCH on this axis. Intracerebroventricular injection 
of MCH increased circulating adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) at 10 min post 
injection. Injection of MCH directly into the paraventricular nucleus (PVN) was 
found to increase both circulating ACTH and corticosterone 10 min after 
injection. Additionally, MCH was found to increase corticotropin-releasing 
factor (CRF) release from hypothalamic explants, and this effect was abolished 
by the specific SLC-1 antagonist SB-568849. Neuropeptide EI, a peptide from the 
same precursor as MCH was also found to increase CRF release from explants. 
These results suggest that MCH has a stimulatory role in the HPA axis via SLC-1, 
and that MCH exerts its effects predominantly through the PVN CRF neuronal 
populations

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2826.2003.00997.x
PMID: 12588515 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Recept Signal Transduct Res. 2003 Feb;23(1):69-81. doi:
10.1081/rrs-120018761.

Different structural requirements for melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) 
interacting with rat MCH-R1 (SLC-1) and mouse B16 cell MCH-R.

Schlumberger SE(1), Saito Y, Giller T, Hintermann E, Tanner H, Jäggin V, Zumsteg 
U, Civelli O, Eberle AN.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Endocrinology, Department of Research (ZLF), University 
Hospital and University Children's Hospital, Basel, Switzerland.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a neuropeptide occurring in all 
vertebrates and some invertebrates and is now known to stimulate pigment 
aggregation in teleost melanophores and food-intake in mammals. Whereas the two 
MCH receptor subtypes hitherto cloned, MCH-R1 and MCH-R2, are thought to mediate 
mainly the central effects of MCH, the MCH-R on pigment cells has not yet been 
identified, although in some studies MCH-R1 was reported to be expressed by 
human melanocytes and melanoma cells. Here we present data of a 
structure-activity study in which 12 MCH peptides were tested on rat MCH-R1 and 
mouse B16 melanoma cell MCH-R, by comparing receptor binding affinities and 
biological activities. For receptor binding analysis with HEK-293 cells 
expressing rat MCH-R1 (SLC-1), the radioligand was [125I]-[Tyr13]-MCH with the 
natural sequence. For B16 cells (F1 and G4F sublines) expressing B16 MCH-R, the 
analog [125I]-[D-Phe13, Tyr19]-MCH served as radioligand. The bioassay used for 
MCH-R1 was intracellular Ca2+ mobilization quantified with the FLIPR instrument, 
whereas for B16 MCH-R the signal determined was MAP kinase activation. Our data 
show that some of the peptides displayed a similar relative increase or decrease 
of potency in both cell types tested. For example, linear MCH with Ser residues 
at positions 7 and 16 was almost inactive whereas a slight increase in 
side-chain hydrophilicity at residues 4 and 8, or truncation of MCH at the 
N-terminus by two residues hardly changed binding affinity or bioactivity. On 
the other hand, salmonic MCH which also lacks the first two residues of the 
mammalian sequence but in addition has different residues at positions 4, 5, 9, 
and 18 exhibited a 5- to 10-fold lower binding activity than MCH in both cell 
systems. A striking difference in ligand recognition between MCH-R1 and B16 
MCH-R was however observed with modifications at position 13 of MCH: whereas 
L-Phe13 in [Phe13, Tyr19]-MCH was well tolerated by both MCH-R1 and B16 MCH-R, 
change of configuration to D-Phe13 in [D-Phe13, Tyr19]-MCH or [D-Phe13]-MCH led 
to a complete loss of biological activity and to a 5- to 10-fold lower binding 
activity with MCH-R1. By contrast, the D-Phe13 residue increased the affinity of 
[D-Phe13, Tyr19]-MCH to B16 MCH-R about 10-fold and elicited MAP kinase 
activation as observed with [Phe13, Tyr19]-MCH or MCH. These data demonstrate 
that ligand recognition by B16 MCH-R differs from that of MCH-R1 in several 
respects, indicating that the B16 MCH-R represents an MCH-R subtype different 
from MCH-R1.

DOI: 10.1081/rrs-120018761
PMID: 12680590 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Endocrinology. 2003 Aug;144(8):3514-23. doi: 10.1210/en.2002-0004.

Melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 activates extracellular 
signal-regulated kinase and synergizes with G(s)-coupled pathways.

Pissios P(1), Trombly DJ, Tzameli I, Maratos-Flier E.

Author information:
(1)Section on Obesity, Research Division, Joslin Diabetes Center, Beth 
Israel-Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 
02215, USA.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a hypothalamic neuropeptide that plays a 
key role in energy homeostasis. Like many neuropeptides, it signals through two 
G protein-coupled receptors. MCH receptor 1 (MCHR1) is the sole receptor 
expressed in rodents and couples to G(i) and G(q) proteins. Little is known 
about the intracellular pathways engaged by MCH and its receptor. Using HEK293 
cells stably expressing MCHR1, we demonstrate that MCH, acting through MCHR1, 
antagonizes the action of forskolin, an adenylate cyclase activator that 
increases intracellular levels of cAMP. MCH also inhibits cAMP induction by the 
G(s)-coupled beta-adrenergic receptor. Activation of either the G(i)- or 
G(s)-dependent pathway typically results in ERK phosphorylation in HEK293 cells. 
In contrast to opposing actions on cAMP synthesis, simultaneous MCH and 
forskolin treatment results in synergistic activation of ERK. This synergy 
proceeds through pertussis toxin-independent pathways and requires several 
enzymatic activities such as protein kinase A, protein kinase C, phospholipase 
C, and Src kinase. Finally, we provide evidence that such positive interactions 
are not limited to cell lines but can also be observed in the brain.

DOI: 10.1210/en.2002-0004
PMID: 12865333 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2003 Aug;7(4):495-511. doi:
10.1517/14728222.7.4.495.

Melanin-concentrating hormone functions in the nervous system: food intake and 
stress.

Hervieu G(1).

Author information:
(1)GlaxoSmithKline R&D, Drug Discovery, Neurology Centre of Excellence for Drug 
Discovery, New Frontiers Science Park - North, HW1713 Building H17, L1-130 C06 
Third Avenue, Harlow, Essex CM19 5AW, UK. guillaume_hervieu-1@gsk.com

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a cyclic neuropeptide, which centrally 
regulates food intake and stress. MCH induces food intake in rodents and, more 
generally, acts as an anabolic signal in energy regulation. In addition, MCH 
seems to be activatory on the stress axis. Two receptors for MCH in humans have 
very recently been characterised, namely, MCH-R1 and MCH-R2. MCH-R1 has received 
considerable attention, as potent and selective antagonists acting at that 
receptor display anxiolytic, antidepressant and/or anorectic properties. Feeding 
and affective disorders are both debilitating conditions that have become 
serious worldwide health threats. There are as yet no efficient and/or safe 
cures that could contain the near-pandemia phenomen of both diseases. Thus, the 
discovery of MCH-R1 antagonists may lead to the development of valuable drugs to 
treat obesity, anxiety and depressive syndromes. In addition, it opens wide 
avenues to probe additional functions of the peptide, both in the brain and in 
the peripheral nervous system.

DOI: 10.1517/14728222.7.4.495
PMID: 12885269 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Aug 19;100(17):10085-90. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1633636100. Epub 2003 Aug 1.

Melanin-concentrating hormone is a critical mediator of the leptin-deficient 
phenotype.

Segal-Lieberman G(1), Bradley RL, Kokkotou E, Carlson M, Trombly DJ, Wang X, 
Bates S, Myers MG Jr, Flier JS, Maratos-Flier E.

Author information:
(1)Research Division, Joslin Diabetes Center, 1 Joslin Place, Boston, MA 02215, 
USA.

Energy homeostasis is regulated by a complex network involving peripheral and 
central signals that determine food intake and energy expenditure. 
Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) plays an essential role in this process. 
Animals treated with MCH develop hyperphagia and obesity. Ablation of the 
prepro-MCH gene leads to a lean phenotype, as does ablation of the rodent MCH 
receptor, MCHR-1. MCH is overexpressed in the leptin-deficient ob/ob mouse, and 
we hypothesized that ablation of MCH in this animal would lead to attenuation of 
its obese phenotype. Compared with ob/ob animals, mice lacking both leptin and 
MCH (double null) had a dramatic reduction in body fat. Surprisingly, the 
hyperphagia of the ob/ob mouse was unaffected. Instead, leanness was secondary 
to a marked increase in energy expenditure resulting from both increased resting 
energy expenditure and locomotor activity. Furthermore, double-null mice showed 
improvements in other parameters impaired in ob/ob mice. Compared with ob/ob 
mice, double-null animals had increased basal body temperature, improved 
response to cold exposure, lower plasma glucocorticoid levels, improved glucose 
tolerance, and reduced expression of stearoyl-CoA desaturase 1 (SCD-1). These 
results highlight the importance of MCH in integration of energy homeostasis 
downstream of leptin and, in particular, the role of MCH in regulation of energy 
expenditure.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1633636100
PMCID: PMC187774
PMID: 12897241 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2004 Apr 16;1678(1):1-6. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbaexp.2004.01.006.

Promoter characterization of the mouse melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1.

Lakaye B(1), Adamantidis A, Coumans B, Grisar T.

Author information:
(1)Center for Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology (CNCM), University of Liege, 
17 Place Delcour, B-4020 Liège, Belgium. B.Lakaye@ulg.ac.be

The gene encoding the mouse melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 was 
isolated and its structural organization and flanking regions were 
characterized. The 3' flanking region is marked by the presence of two 
polyadenylation signals but used with different frequencies. RNase protection 
and 5' rapid amplification of cDNA ends (RACE) identified multiple transcription 
initiation sites between -150 and -203 bp upstream of the ATG initiation codon. 
Functional analysis of deletion mutants reveals a cell independent 
transcriptional activity localized between nucleotide -305 and -589. The 
proximal 1.5 kb region does not possess consensus TATA or CAAT boxes but has 
several consensus sequences for regulatory elements including USF, GATA, AP1, 
AP4, MyoD, GKLF and Ikaros that could explain the broad expression of the 
receptor.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbaexp.2004.01.006
PMID: 15093132 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Anal Biochem. 2004 May 15;328(2):187-95. doi: 10.1016/j.ab.2004.01.017.

Europium-labeled melanin-concentrating hormone analogues: ligands for measuring 
binding to melanin-concentrating hormone receptors 1 and 2.

Gao X(1), Hsu CK, Heinz LJ, Morin J, Shi Y, Shukla NK, Smiley DL, Xu J, Zhong B, 
Slieker LJ.

Author information:
(1)Endocrine Discovery Research, Lilly Research Laboratories, Eli Lilly and Co., 
DC 0545, Indianapolis, IN 46285, USA.

We investigated the use of Eu3+ chelate-labeled analogues of 
melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) as ligands for both human MCH receptors 
(MCHR1 and MCHR2). The analogues employed were Ala17 MCH, S36057 
(Y-ADO-RC*MLGRVFRPC*W, where ADO=8-amino-3,6-dioxyoctanoyl and *=disulfide 
bond), and R2P (RC*MLGRVFRPC*Y-NH2). The peptides were readily labeled on the 
alpha-amino residue with the Eu3+ chelate of 
N1-(p-isothiocyanatobenzyl)-diethylenetriamine-N1,N2,N3,N3-tetraacetic acid and 
then purified by reverse-phase fast-performance liquid chromatography at neutral 
pH to maintain Eu3+ chelation. Both labeled Ala17 MCH and S36057 had high 
affinity for MCHR1 ( Kd = 0.37 and 0.059nM, respectively) while Eu3+ -labeled 
S36057 and R2P had high affinity for MCHR2 ( Kd = 0.16 and 0.10nM, 
respectively). Labeled Ala17 MCH had little demonstrable binding affinity for 
MCHR2. Eu3+ -labeled S36057 and R2P were full agonists at MCHR1 when assessed by 
measurement of agonist-stimulated GTPgamma(35)S binding. Competition binding 
experiments with both MCHR isoforms, a series of previously characterized 
alanine scan MCH analogues, and a recently identified nonpeptide MCHR1-selective 
antagonist T-226296 confirmed the expected receptor selectivity. These studies 
further extend the utility of Eu3+ chelate time-resolved fluorescence for the 
development of high-sensitivity, nonradioactive receptor binding assays and 
demonstrate the need to select the optimal ligand for labeling.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ab.2004.01.017
PMID: 15113696 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Endocrinology. 2004 Aug;145(8):3712-23. doi: 10.1210/en.2003-1638. Epub 2004
Apr  29.

The basic residues in the membrane-proximal C-terminal tail of the rat 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 are required for receptor function.

Tetsuka M(1), Saito Y, Imai K, Doi H, Maruyama K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Saitama Medical School, Iruma-gun, Saitama 
350-0492, Japan.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a hypothalamic neuropeptide that plays a 
key role in food intake. It acts through two G protein-coupled receptors 
(GPCRs), MCH1R and MCH2R, of which MCH1R is the primary regulator of food 
intake. We have previously reported that N-linked glycosylation of the 
extracellular domain of MCH1R is necessary for cell surface expression and 
signal transduction. We now report a role for the rat MCH1R C-terminal region. 
We constructed serial C-terminal truncation mutants and determined the resulting 
changes in protein expression, cell surface expression, ligand binding, and 
MCH-stimulated calcium influx. By analyzing two mutants, deltaT317 (deletion of 
36 C-terminal amino acids) and deltaR321 (deletion of 32 C-terminal amino 
acids), we found that the region between Phe(318) and Arg(321)) was responsible 
for signal transduction. A more detailed analysis was performed with single or 
multiple residue mutations. Single mutations of Arg(319), Lys(320), or Arg(321) 
exhibited a decrease in the cell surface expression, whereas mutations of either 
Arg(319) or Lys(320), but not Arg(321), showed a significant reduction in the 
calcium influx. Furthermore, simultaneous mutations of Arg(319) and Lys(320) 
produced a pronounced decrease in the efficacy of calcium influx stimulation 
compared with single mutations. A computational analysis revealed a dibasic 
amino acid motif that is conserved among many class 1 GPCRs and may be part of 
the amphiphilic cytoplasmic helix 8 (an eight-cytoplasmic helix). Our results 
therefore provide new insights into the role of the putative helix 8 in the 
regulation of GPCR function.

DOI: 10.1210/en.2003-1638
PMID: 15117878 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2004 Oct;287(4):R749-58. doi: 
10.1152/ajpregu.00134.2004. Epub 2004 May 6.

Mice lacking melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 demonstrate increased 
heart rate associated with altered autonomic activity.

Astrand A(1), Bohlooly-Y M, Larsdotter S, Mahlapuu M, Andersén H, Tornell J, 
Ohlsson C, Snaith M, Morgan DG.

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Integrative Pharmacology, AstraZeneca R&D Mölndal, S-431 83 Mölndal, 
Sweden.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) plays an important role in energy balance. 
The current studies were carried out on a new line of mice lacking the rodent 
MCH receptor (MCHR1(-/-) mice). These mice confirmed the previously reported 
lean phenotype characterized by increased energy expenditure and modestly 
increased caloric intake. Because MCH is expressed in the lateral hypothalamic 
area, which also has an important role in the regulation of the autonomic 
nervous system, heart rate and blood pressure were measured by a telemetric 
method to investigate whether the increased energy expenditure in these mice 
might be due to altered autonomic nervous system activity. Male MCHR1(-/-) mice 
demonstrated a significantly increased heart rate [24-h period: wild type 495 
+/- 4 vs. MCHR1(-/-) 561 +/- 8 beats/min (P < 0.001); dark phase: wild type 506 
+/- 8 vs. MCHR1(-/-) 582 +/- 9 beats/min (P < 0.001); light phase: wild type 484 
+/- 13 vs. MCHR1(-/-) 539 +/- 9 beats/min (P < 0.005)] with no significant 
difference in mean arterial pressure [wild type 110 +/- 0.3 vs. MCHR1(-/-) 113 
+/- 0.4 mmHg (P > 0.05)]. Locomotor activity and core body temperature were 
higher in the MCHR1(-/-) mice during the dark phase only and thus temporally 
dissociated from heart rate differences. On fasting, wild-type animals rapidly 
downregulated body temperature and heart rate. MCHR1(-/-) mice displayed a 
distinct delay in the onset of this downregulation. To investigate the mechanism 
underlying these differences, autonomic blockade experiments were carried out. 
Administration of the adrenergic antagonist metoprolol completely reversed the 
tachycardia seen in MCHR1(-/-) mice, suggesting an increased sympathetic tone.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpregu.00134.2004
PMID: 15130877 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Jun 11;318(4):964-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2004.04.122.

Osteoporosis in MCHR1-deficient mice.

Bohlooly-Y M(1), Mahlapuu M, Andersén H, Astrand A, Hjorth S, Svensson L, 
Törnell J, Snaith MR, Morgan DG, Ohlsson C.

Author information:
(1)AstraZeneca Transgenics and Comparative Genomics Centre, AstraZeneca R&D, 
Mölndal, Sweden.

It is well recognized that the hypothalamus is of central importance in the 
regulation of food intake and fat mass. Recent studies indicate that it also 
plays an important role in the regulation of bone mass. Melanin concentrating 
hormone (MCH) is highly expressed in the hypothalamus and has been implicated in 
regulation of energy homeostasis. We developed MCHR1 inactivated mice to 
evaluate the physiological role of this receptor. Interestingly, the MCHR1(-/-) 
mice have osteoporosis, caused by a reduction in the cortical bone mass, while 
the amount of trabecular bone is unaffected. The reduction in cortical bone mass 
is due to decreased cortical thickness. Serum levels of c-telopeptide, a marker 
of bone resorption, are increased in MCHR1(-/-) mice, indicating that the 
MCHR1(-/-) mice have a high bone turnover osteoporosis. In conclusion, the 
MCHR1(-/-) mice have osteoporosis, indicating that MCHR1-signalling is involved 
in a tonic stimulation of bone mass.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2004.04.122
PMID: 15147966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Obes Res. 2004 May;12(5):743-9. doi: 10.1038/oby.2004.89.

Melanin-concentrating hormone receptor mutations and human obesity: functional 
analysis.

Gibson WT(1), Pissios P, Trombly DJ, Luan J, Keogh J, Wareham NJ, Maratos-Flier 
E, O'Rahilly S, Farooqi IS.

Author information:
(1)University Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Cambridge Institute of 
medical Research, Cambridge United Kingdom.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH), a neuropeptide highly expressed in the 
lateral hypothalamus, has an important role in the regulation of energy balance 
and body weight in rodents. We examined whether mutations in the two known MCH 
receptors might be associated with obesity-related phenotypes in humans. Among 
106 subjects with severe early onset obesity and a history of hyperphagia, we 
found two missense variants in MCHR1: Y181H and R248Q. Neither of these was 
found in 192 normal weight controls. R248Q cosegregated with obesity across two 
generations; family data were unavailable for Y181H. When expressed in HEK293 
cells, R248Q showed no evidence of constitutive activation or ligand 
hypersensitivity for extracellular signal-regulated kinase phosphorylation. In 
addition, R248Q showed no enhanced suppression of cAMP generation. Two common 
single-nucleotide polymorphisms were found to be in linkage disequilibrium: 
g.-114A>G and c.39C>T. No association between either of these single-nucleotide 
polymorphisms and obesity-related phenotypes was found among a population cohort 
of 541 whites. Only two rare noncoding variants were found in MCHR2. In 
conclusion, mutations in the MCH receptors are not commonly found in humans with 
severe early onset obesity. Clarification of the relationship of these variants 
to obesity must await study in other populations and/or in genetically modified 
mice.

Copyright 2004 NAASO

DOI: 10.1038/oby.2004.89
PMID: 15166293 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Proteins. 2004 Aug 15;56(3):430-48. doi: 10.1002/prot.20125.

Structural features of the inactive and active states of the 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptors: insights from molecular simulations.

Vitale RM(1), Pedone C, De Benedetti PG, Fanelli F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, 
Italy.

Comparative molecular dynamics simulations of both subtypes 1 and 2 of the 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptor (MCHR1 and MCHR2, respectively) in their 
free and hormone-bound forms have been carried out. The hormone has been used in 
its full-length and truncated forms, as well as in 16 mutated forms. Moreover, 
MCHR1 has been simulated in complex with T-226296, a novel orally active and 
selective antagonist. The comparative analysis of an extended number of receptor 
configurations suggests that the differences between inactive (i.e., free and 
antagonist-bound) and active (i.e., agonist-bound) states of MCHRs involve the 
receptor portions close to the E/DRY and NPxxY motifs, with prominence to the 
cytosolic extensions of helices 2, 3, 6, and 7. In fact, the active forms of 
these receptors share the release of selected intramolecular interactions found 
in the inactive forms, such as that between R3.50 of the E/DRY motif and D2.40, 
and that between Y7.53 of the NPxxY motif and F7.60. Another feature of the 
active forms of both MCHRs is the approach of "helix 8" to the cytosolic 
extension of helix 3. These features of the active forms are concurrent with the 
opening of a cleft at the cytosolic end of the helix bundle. For both MCHRs, the 
agonist-induced chemical information transfer from the extracellular to the 
cytosolic domains is mediated by a cluster of aromatic amino acids in helix 6, 
following the ligand interaction with selected amino acids in the extracellular 
half of the receptor.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/prot.20125
PMID: 15229878 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Med Chem. 2004 Jul 29;47(16):3962-71. doi: 10.1021/jm040762v.

A virtual screening approach to finding novel and potent antagonists at the 
melanin-concentrating hormone 1 receptor.

Clark DE(1), Higgs C, Wren SP, Dyke HJ, Wong M, Norman D, Lockey PM, Roach AG.

Author information:
(1)Argenta Discovery Ltd., 8/9 Spire Green Centre, Flex Meadow, Harlow, Essex, 
CM19 5TR, UK. david.clark @argentadiscovery.com

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) has been known to be an appetite-stimulating 
peptide for a number of years. However, it is only recently that MCH has been 
discovered to be the natural ligand for a previously "orphan" G-protein-coupled 
receptor, now designated MCH-1R. This receptor has been shown to mediate the 
effects of MCH on appetite and body weight, and consequently, drug discovery 
programs have begun to exploit this information in the search for MCH-1R 
antagonists for the treatment of obesity. In this paper, we report the rapid 
discovery of multiple, structurally distinct series of MCH-1R antagonists using 
a variety of virtual screening techniques. The most potent of these compounds 
(12) demonstrated an IC(50) value of 55 nM in the primary screen and exhibited 
antagonist properties in a functional cellular assay measuring Ca(2+) release. 
More potent compounds were identified by follow-up searches around the initial 
hit. A proposed binding mode for compound 12 in a homology model of the MCH-1R 
is also presented.

DOI: 10.1021/jm040762v
PMID: 15267235 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Expert Opin Investig Drugs. 2004 Sep;13(9):1113-22. doi: 
10.1517/13543784.13.9.1113.

Therapeutic potential of melanin-concentrating hormone-1 receptor antagonists 
for the treatment of obesity.

Kowalski TJ(1), McBriar MD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular/Metabolic Disease Research, Schering-Plough 
Research Institute, 2015 Galloping Hill Road, Kenilworth, NJ 07033, USA. 
timothy.kowalski@spcorp.com

The compelling genetic and pharmacological evidence implicating 
melanin-concentrating hormone-1 receptor (MCH-1R) signalling in the regulation 
of food intake and energy expenditure has generated a great deal of interest by 
pharmaceutical companies for the discovery of MCH-1R antagonists, evidenced by 
the increased number of patents describing MCH-1R antagonists for the treatment 
of obesity and metabolic syndrome. The structural diversity of small molecular 
weight drug-like MCH-1R antagonists produced and preclinical studies showing 
hypophagia and weight loss with small molecular weight and peptidal antagonists 
in rodents is encouraging and suggests that the identification of clinical 
candidates will be forthcoming.

DOI: 10.1517/13543784.13.9.1113
PMID: 15330743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Obes Res. 2004 Aug;12(8):1327-34. doi: 10.1038/oby.2004.167.

Identification and characterization of single-nucleotide polymorphisms in MCH-R1 
and MCH-R2.

Hawes BE(1), Green B, O'Neill K, Fried S, Arreaza MG, Qiu P, Simon JS.

Author information:
(1)K15-3600, Schering Plough Research Institute, 2015 Galloping Hill Road, 
Kenilworth, NJ 07033, USA. brian.hawes@spcorp.com

OBJECTIVE: To identify and functionally characterize single-nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) in melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH)-R1 and -R2.
RESEARCH METHODS AND PROCEDURES: The entire coding regions and intron/exon 
splice junction regions of MCH-R1 and MCH-R2 were sequenced from anonymous white 
(n=45) and African-American (n=46) individuals. DNA was analyzed, and SNPs were 
identified using Phred, Phrap, and Consed software. DNA constructs containing 
MCH-R1 and MCH-R2 SNPs were generated and expressed in CHO cells. The effect of 
the SNPs in MCH-R1 and MCH-R2 were assessed in receptor binding assays and 
functional assays measuring changes in intracellular cAMP and Ca2+ levels.
RESULTS: We identified 12 SNPs in the MCH-R1 gene. Two of these SNPs are in 
coding regions, and one produces an arginine-for-glycine substitution at residue 
34 in the MCH-R1 sequence. This SNP is present at a minor allele frequency of 
15% in the African-American population tested in this study. We identified eight 
SNPs in the MCH-R2 gene. Four of these SNPs are in coding regions, and two 
produce amino acid substitutions. Lysine substitutes for arginine at residue 63 
of the African-American population, and glutamine substitutes for arginine at 
residue 152 in whites (minor allele frequency of 2% for both SNPs). No changes 
in receptor binding or functional signaling were observed with the SNP mutations 
in MCH-R1 or MCH-R2.
DISCUSSION: These data indicate that potential therapeutics designed to act at 
the MCH receptor are unlikely to have altered effects in subpopulations that 
express variant forms of MCH-R1 or MCH-R2.

DOI: 10.1038/oby.2004.167
PMID: 15340116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2004 Oct 4;14(19):4873-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bmcl.2004.07.032.

Synthesis and evaluation of 2-amino-8-alkoxy quinolines as MCHr1 antagonists. 
Part 1.

Souers AJ(1), Wodka D, Gao J, Lewis JC, Vasudevan A, Gentles R, Brodjian S, 
Dayton B, Ogiela CA, Fry D, Hernandez LE, Marsh KC, Collins CA, Kym PR.

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Diseases Research, Global Pharmaceutical Research and Development, 
Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, IL 60064, USA. andrew.souers@abbott.com

A high-throughput screen was performed in order to identify chemotypes that are 
bound by the melanin concentrating hormone receptor-1 (MCHr1). A novel 
2-amino-8-alkoxyquinoline compound (1) was identified and subsequently optimized 
using a parallel and automated procedure for the rapid production of multiple 
analogs. The structure-activity relationships that emerged from this effort are 
described, along with selected pharmacokinetic parameters of compound (d)-61 
when dosed orally in diet-induced obese mice.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2004.07.032
PMID: 15341942 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2004 Oct 4;14(19):4879-82. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2004.07.034.

Synthesis and evaluation of 2-amino-8-alkoxy quinolines as MCHr1 antagonists. 
Part 2.

Vasudevan A(1), Wodka D, Verzal MK, Souers AJ, Gao J, Brodjian S, Fry D, Dayton 
B, Marsh KC, Hernandez LE, Ogiela CA, Collins CA, Kym PR.

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Diseases Research, Global Pharmaceutical Research and Development, 
Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, IL 60064, USA. anil.vasudevan@abbott.com

The continued SAR investigation of 2-amino-8-alkoxy quinolines as melanin 
concentrating hormone receptor-1 (MCHr1) antagonists is reported. Prior 
hit-to-lead efforts resulted in the identification of 1 as a robust MCHr1 
antagonist. Further delineation of the structural parameters essential for 
MCHr1-binding affinity of this class of nontraditional GPCR ligands resulted in 
the identification of compounds such as 33, 34 and 37, which demonstrate single 
digit nanomolar antagonism of MCHr1-mediated Ca(2+) release. The synthesis and 
biological evaluation of these compounds are reported.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2004.07.034
PMID: 15341943 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2004 Oct 4;14(19):4883-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bmcl.2004.07.035.

Synthesis and evaluation of 2-amino-8-alkoxy quinolines as MCHr1 antagonists. 
Part 3.

Souers AJ(1), Wodka D, Gao J, Lewis JC, Vasudevan A, Brodjian S, Dayton B, 
Ogiela CA, Fry D, Hernandez LE, Marsh KC, Collins CA, Kym PR.

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Diseases Research, Global Pharmaceutical Research and Development, 
Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park IL 60064, USA. andrew.souers@abbott.com

Prior SAR studies on 2-amino-8-alkoxyquinoline MCHr1 antagonists demonstrated 
that compounds with acyclic amide-containing sidechains displayed exceptional 
binding and functional potency, but negligible CNS penetration. Related analogs 
with acyclic benzylamine-containing sidechains showed greatly improved CNS 
exposure, but suffered in functional potency. In this report, we demonstrate 
that cyclization of these benzylic amine sidechains affords compounds that 
combine the best elements of potency and CNS penetration among this class of 
antagonists. This is exemplified by compound 21, which has sub-nanomolar MCHr1 
binding affinity, good functional potency, and excellent CNS exposure over 24h.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2004.07.035
PMID: 15341944 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2004 Sep 28;128(2):150-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.molbrainres.2004.06.010.

Increases in melanin-concentrating hormone and MCH receptor levels in the 
hypothalamus of dietary-obese rats.

Elliott JC(1), Harrold JA, Brodin P, Enquist K, Bäckman A, Byström M, Lindgren 
K, King P, Williams G.

Author information:
(1)Neuroendocrine and Obesity Biology Unit, Department of Medicine, Liverpool 
University, 4th Floor U.C.D., Duncan Building, Daulby Street, Liverpool, UK.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a hypothalamic neuropeptide that 
stimulates feeding and increases body weight in rodents. We studied the role of 
the system in energy homeostasis and its regulation by the satiety signals, 
leptin and insulin. We used real-time PCR to measure the hypothalamic expression 
of MCH and its receptor (MCHR1) in two contrasting models of altered nutritional 
status, namely, obesity induced by 8 weeks' voluntary overeating and food 
restriction for 10 days. Diet-fed rats were stratified according to final total 
fat-pad mass into a 'high fat gain' group (HG) and 'low fat gain' group (LG). 
MCH mRNA levels were increased by 31% (p>0.05) and 49% (p<0.05) in the LG and 
HG, respectively, compared with controls. MCHR1 mRNA levels rose by 118% in the 
LG (p<0.01) and 85% in the HG (p<0.01). There were significant positive 
correlations (p<0.05) between plasma leptin concentration and both MCH and MCHR1 
mRNA levels, and between plasma insulin and MCHR1 expression. A positive 
correlation was also observed between MCH and MCHR1 mRNA levels (p<0.05). 
Food-restricted rats showed no significant alterations in the levels of either 
MCH mRNA or MCHR1 mRNA. In a second experiment, we measured MCH peptide levels 
in five discrete hypothalamic areas of dietary-obese rats. MCH concentrations 
were significantly increased in the arcuate nuclei of the HG (p<0.05) and the 
paraventricular nuclei of both the LG (p<0.05) and HG (p<0.05), compared with 
their lean counterparts. These results suggest that the MCH system becomes more 
active in dietary obesity and could be involved in enhancing appetite for 
palatable food. The possibility that MCH and MCHR1 expression are positively 
regulated by leptin and insulin, which normally inhibit feeding, is a putative 
explanation for how appetite for palatable food is able to override mechanisms 
that prevent the development of obesity.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molbrainres.2004.06.010
PMID: 15363890 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Peptides. 2004 Oct;25(10):1585-95. doi: 10.1016/j.peptides.2004.06.022.

Expression and characterization of melanin-concentrating hormone receptors on 
mammalian cell lines.

Eberle AN(1), Mild G, Schlumberger S, Drozdz R, Hintermann E, Zumsteg U.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Endocrinology, Department of Research, University Hospital 
Basel and University Children's Hospital Basel, Klingelbergstrasse 23, CH-4031 
Basel, Switzerland. alex-n@unibas.ch

The neuropeptide melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is expressed in central and 
peripheral tissues where it participates in the complex network regulating 
energy homeostasis as well as in other physiologically important functions. Two 
MCH receptor subtypes, MCH-R1 and MCH-R2, have been cloned which signal through 
activation of Gi/o/q proteins and hence regulate different intracellular 
signals, such as inhibition of cAMP formation, stimulation of IP3 production, 
increase in intracellular free Ca2+ and/or activation of MAP kinases. Most of 
the data were obtained with cell systems heterologously expressing either of the 
MCH receptors. Fewer reports exist on studies with cell lines which endogenously 
express MCH receptors. Here, we describe human and other mammalian cell lines 
with which MCH receptor activation can be studied under "natural" conditions and 
we summarize the characteristics and signaling pathways of the MCH receptors in 
the different cell systems.

DOI: 10.1016/j.peptides.2004.06.022
PMID: 15476925 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Peptides. 2004 Oct;25(10):1597-604. doi: 10.1016/j.peptides.2004.03.026.

Properties of rat melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 internalization.

Saito Y(1), Tetsuka M, Li Y, Kurose H, Maruyama K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Saitama Medical School, Saitama 390-0452, Japan. 
yumisait@saitama-med.ac.jp

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a neuropeptide that plays an important 
role in several physiological processes. It activates two G protein-coupled 
receptors (GPCRs), MCH1R and MCH2R, of which MCH1R seems to be a key regulator 
of food intake. By using HEK293T cells stably transfected with Flag-tagged rat 
MCH1R, we investigated the mechanism underlying the MCH-induced internalization 
pathway, which is important for the desensitization or regulation of the 
receptor response. Quantitative analysis by flow cytometry indicated that the 
rate of MCH1R internalization progressed in a rapid and time-dependent manner 
during the first 30 min, and was partly inhibited by pretreatment with the 
selective protein kinase C (PKC) inhibitor Go6850. Overexpression of 
dominant-negative beta-arrestin-2 (284-409) or dynamin I-K44A significantly 
prevented MCH-induced internalization of MCH1R, while overexpression of 
dominant-negative beta-arrestin-1-V53D had no effect. A triple-substituted 
mutant at Thr317, Ser325 and Thr342 to Ala residue in the C-terminus 
significantly prevented MCH-induced receptor internalization. Similar extents of 
internalization prevention were noted with the deletion mutants DeltaThr342 and 
DeltaGlu346, lacking 11 and 7 residues in the C-terminal tail, respectively. Our 
data suggest that MCH1R undergoes rapid MCH-induced internalization through a 
PKC-, beta-arrestin-2- and dynamin I-dependent pathway and that a portion of the 
C-terminal tail plays an important role in the internalization process.

DOI: 10.1016/j.peptides.2004.03.026
PMID: 15476926 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Peptides. 2004 Oct;25(10):1605-11. doi: 10.1016/j.peptides.2004.02.023.

Beyond skin color: emerging roles of melanin-concentrating hormone in energy 
homeostasis and other physiological functions.

Shi Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Endocrine Research, Lilly Research Laboratories, DC 0545, Eli Lilly and 
Company, Lilly Corporate Center, Indianapolis, IN 46285, USA. 
shi_yuguang@lilly.com

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a cyclic peptide that mediates its 
effects by the activation of two G-protein-coupled seven transmembrane receptors 
(MCHR1 and MCHR2) in humans. In contrast to its primary role in regulating skin 
color in fish, MCH has evolved in mammals to regulate dynamic physiological 
functions, from food intake and energy expenditure to behavior and emotion. 
Chronic infusion or transgenic expression of MCH stimulates feeding and 
increases adipocity, whereas targeted deletion of MCH or its receptor (MCHR1) 
leads to resistance to diet-induced obesity with increased energy expenditure 
and thermogenesis. The involvement of MCH in energy homeostasis and in brain 
activity has also been validated in mice treated with non-peptide antagonists, 
suggesting that blockade of MCHR1 could provide a viable approach for treatment 
of obesity and certain neurological disorders. This review focuses on emerging 
roles of MCH in regulating central and peripheral mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1016/j.peptides.2004.02.023
PMID: 15476927 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


54. IDrugs. 2004 Oct;7(10):898-900.

American Chemical Society--228th National Meeting. Metabolism. 22-26 August 
2004, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Ognjenovic M(1), Paterson D.

Author information:
(1)Thomson Scientific, Middlesex House, 34-42 Cleveland Street, London, W1T 4JE, 
UK. marica.ognjenovic@thomson.com

PMID: 15478009 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Regul Pept. 2005 Jan 15;124(1-3):53-63. doi: 10.1016/j.regpep.2004.06.026.

Enhanced running wheel activity of both Mch1r- and Pmch-deficient mice.

Zhou D(1), Shen Z, Strack AM, Marsh DJ, Shearman LP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Merck Research Laboratories, RY80Y-150, Merck & 
Co., Inc., 126 E. Lincoln Ave., Rahway, NJ 07065, USA.

Mch1r-deficient (Mch1r(-/-)) mice are hyperphagic, hyperactive, lean, and 
resistant to diet-induced obesity. To examine whether the MCH1R is involved in 
regulating activity-based energy expenditure, we investigated voluntary wheel 
running (WR) activity of wild-type (WT) and Mch1r(-/-) mice basally, in response 
to diets with different caloric density and with different feeding schedules. We 
also evaluated WR activity of mice with ablation of the prepro-MCH gene 
(Pmch(-/-) mice). Dark cycle WR activity of Mch1r(-/-) mice fed low fat (LF) 
chow was increased significantly relative to WT mice. Transition to moderate 
high-fat (MHF) diet was associated with an increase in nocturnal WR activity in 
both genotypes. Both Mch1r(-/-) and WT mice exhibited food anticipatory activity 
(FAA) before the daily scheduled feeding time, indicating that MCH1R is not 
required for FAA. Naloxone (3 mg/kg, i.p.) suppressed WR activity of both 
genotypes, suggesting opioid regulation of locomotor activity. WR increased 
nocturnal dynorphin mRNA levels in Mch1r(-/-) brain. Importantly, Pmch-deficient 
mice had significantly enhanced WR activity relative to WT controls. These 
results suggest that endogenous MCH plays an inhibitory role in regulating 
locomotor activity. In summary, we demonstrated enhanced WR activities in mice 
lacking either MCH or its cognate receptor.

DOI: 10.1016/j.regpep.2004.06.026
PMID: 15544841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Biol Chem. 2005 Mar 4;280(9):8208-20. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M405215200. Epub
2004  Dec 6.

Periplakin interferes with G protein activation by the melanin-concentrating 
hormone receptor-1 by binding to the proximal segment of the receptor C-terminal 
tail.

Murdoch H(1), Feng GJ, Bächner D, Ormiston L, White JH, Richter D, Milligan G.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Pharmacology Group, Division of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 
Institute of Biomedical and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 
8QQ, Scotland, United Kingdom.

In mice genetic ablation of expression of either melanin-concentrating hormone 
or the melanin-concentrating hormone-1 receptor results in alterations in energy 
metabolism and a lean phenotype. There is thus great interest in the function 
and regulation of this receptor. Using the yeast two-hybrid system we identified 
an interaction of the actin- and intermediate filament-binding protein 
periplakin with the intracellular C-terminal tail of the melanin-concentrating 
hormone-1 receptor. Direct association of these proteins was verified in 
pull-down and coimmunoprecipitation experiments. Truncations and internal 
deletions delineated the site of interaction to a group of 11 amino acids 
proximal to transmembrane helix VII, which was distinct from the binding site 
for the melanin-concentrating hormone-1 receptor-interacting zinc finger 
protein. Immunohistochemistry demonstrated coexpression of periplakin with 
melanin-concentrating hormone-1 receptor in specific cells of the piriform 
cortex, amygdala, and other structures of the adult mouse brain. Coexpression of 
the melanin-concentrating hormone-1 receptor with periplakin in human embryonic 
kidney 293 cells did not prevent agonist-mediated internalization of the 
receptor but did interfere with binding of (35)S-labeled guanosine 
5'-3-O-(thio)triphosphate ([(35)S]GTPgammaS) to the G protein Galpha(o1) and the 
elevation of [Ca(2+)](i). Coexpression of the receptor with the interacting zinc 
finger protein did not modulate receptor internalization or G protein 
activation. The interaction of periplakin with receptors was selective. 
Coexpression of periplakin with the IP prostanoid receptor did not result in 
coimmunoprecipitation nor interfere with agonist-mediated binding of 
[(35)S]GTPgammaS to the G protein Galpha(s). Periplakin is the first protein 
described to modify the capacity of the melanin-concentrating hormone-1 receptor 
to initiate signal transduction.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M405215200
PMID: 15590649 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


57. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2005 Apr;90(4):2412-9. doi: 10.1210/jc.2004-1145.
Epub  2005 Jan 25.

Increased melanin concentrating hormone receptor type I in the human 
hypothalamic infundibular nucleus in cachexia.

Unmehopa UA(1), van Heerikhuize JJ, Spijkstra W, Woods JW, Howard AD, Zycband E, 
Feighner SD, Hreniuk DL, Palyha OC, Guan XM, Macneil DJ, Van der Ploeg LH, Swaab 
DF.

Author information:
(1)Netherlands Institute for Brain Research, Meibergdreef 33, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) exerts a positive regulation on appetite and 
binds to the G protein-coupled receptors, MCH1R and MCH2R. In rodents, MCH is 
produced by neurons in the lateral hypothalamus with projections to various 
hypothalamic and other brain sites. In the present study, MCH1R was shown, by 
immunocytochemistry, to be present in the human infundibular nucleus/median 
eminence, paraventricular nucleus, lateral hypothalamic area, and perifornical 
area, although in the latter two regions, only a few MCH1R-containing cells were 
found. In addition, MCH1R staining was found in nerve fibers in the 
periventricular nucleus, dorsomedial and ventromedial nucleus, suprachiasmatic 
nucleus, and tuberomammillary nucleus. A significant 1.6 times increase in the 
number of MCH1R cell body staining was found in the infundibular nucleus in 
postmortem brain material of cachectic patients, compared with matched controls, 
supporting a role for this receptor in energy homeostasis in the human.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2004-1145
PMID: 15671106 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Neurosci. 2005 Jan 26;25(4):914-22. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4079-04.2005.

Mesolimbic dopamine super-sensitivity in melanin-concentrating hormone-1 
receptor-deficient mice.

Smith DG(1), Tzavara ET, Shaw J, Luecke S, Wade M, Davis R, Salhoff C, Nomikos 
GG, Gehlert DR.

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Discovery Research, Lilly Research Laboratories, Eli Lilly and 
Company, Indianapolis, Indiana 46285, USA. dgsmith@lilly.com

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) neurons and MCH-1 receptors (MCH1r) densely 
populate mesolimbic dopaminergic brain regions such as the nucleus accumbens 
(NAc). The regulation of dopamine by MCH1r was suggested to be an important 
mechanism underlying the hyperactive phenotype of MCH1r knock-out (ko) mice. 
However, MCH1r modulation of monoamine neurotransmission has yet to be examined. 
We tested whether dopamine, norepinephrine, and serotonin function is 
dysregulated in MCH1r ko and wild-type (wt) mice. MCH1r ko mice exhibited robust 
hyperactivity in a novel or familiar environment and were super-sensitive to the 
locomotor activating effects of d-amphetamine and the D1 agonist 
2,3,4,5-tetrahydro-7,8-dihydroxy-1-phenyl-1H-3-benazepine HCl. The D2 agonist, 
quinpirole, decreased locomotion similarly in both ko and wt mice. Tissue 
contents of dopamine within the NAc and caudate-putamen were not significantly 
different in ko compared with wt mice. Basal and amphetamine-evoked NAc 
dopamine, norepinephrine, and serotonin efflux, as measured using in vivo 
microdialysis, were not significantly different between genotypes. In contrast, 
D1-like and D2-like receptor binding were significantly higher within the 
olfactory tubercle, ventral tegmental area, and NAc core and shell of ko mice. 
Norepinephrine transporter (NET) binding was significantly elevated within the 
NAc shell and globus pallidus of ko mice, whereas serotonin transporter binding 
was decreased in the NAc shell. Thus, deletion of MCH1r results in an 
upregulation of mesolimbic dopamine receptors and NET, indicating that MCH1r may 
negatively modulate mesolimbic monoamine function. MCH1r may be an important 
therapeutic target for neuropsychiatric disorders involving dysregulation of 
limbic monoamine systems.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4079-04.2005
PMCID: PMC6725636
PMID: 15673672 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2005 May;313(2):831-9. doi: 10.1124/jpet.104.081711.
Epub  2005 Jan 26.

Anxiolytic- and antidepressant-like profile of ATC0065 and ATC0175: nonpeptidic 
and orally active melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 antagonists.

Chaki S(1), Funakoshi T, Hirota-Okuno S, Nishiguchi M, Shimazaki T, Iijima M, 
Grottick AJ, Kanuma K, Omodera K, Sekiguchi Y, Okuyama S, Tran TA, Semple G, 
Thomsen W.

Author information:
(1)Taisho Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Saitama, Japan. s.chaki@po.rd.taisho.co.jp

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a cyclic peptide produced in the lateral 
hypothalamus. It has been implicated in a number of physiological processes 
including feeding behavior, energy balance, and the regulation of emotional 
states. Here, we report in vitro and in vivo profiles of ATC0065 
[N(2)-[cis-4-({2-[4-bromo-2-(trifluoromethoxy)phenyl]ethyl}amino)cyclohexyl]-N(4), 
N(4)-dimethylquinazoline-2,4-diamine dihydrochloride] and ATC0175 
[N-(cis-4-{[4-(dimethylamino)quinazolin-2-yl]amino}cyclohexyl)-3,4-difluorobenzamide 
hydrochloride], newly synthesized MCH receptor 1 (MCHR1) antagonists. Both 
ATC0065 and ATC0175 had high affinities for human MCHR1 with IC(50) values of 
15.7 +/- 1.95 and 7.23 +/- 0.59 nM, respectively. Both ATC0065 (IC(50) = 21.4 
+/- 1.57 nM) and ATC0175 (IC(50) = 13.5 +/- 0.78 nM) showed potent antagonist 
activities at MCHR1, as assessed by MCH-increased guanosine 
5'-O-(3-[(35)S]thio)phosphate ([(35)S]GTPgammaS) binding to human MCHR1. Oral 
administration of ATC0065 (3-30 mg/kg) or ATC0175 (1-10 mg/kg) significantly 
reduced immobility time in the forced swimming test in rats, indicating 
antidepressant-like effects. Both ATC0065 and ATC0175 significantly reversed 
swim stress-induced anxiety in the elevated plus-maze test in rats and 
stress-induced hyperthermia in mice. ATC0175 significantly increased social 
interaction between unfamiliar rats and reduced separation-induced vocalizations 
in guinea pig pups, indicating anxiolytic potential. In contrast, ATC0065 and 
ATC0175 did not affect spontaneous locomotor activity or rotarod performance in 
rats. These findings indicate that ATC0065 and ATC0175 are potent and orally 
active MCHR1 antagonists with anxiolytic and antidepressant activity in rodents.

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.104.081711
PMID: 15677346 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


60. J Med Chem. 2005 Mar 10;48(5):1318-21. doi: 10.1021/jm0490890.

Identification of 2-(4-benzyloxyphenyl)-N- 
[1-(2-pyrrolidin-1-yl-ethyl)-1H-indazol-6-yl]acetamide, an orally efficacious 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 antagonist for the treatment of 
obesity.

Souers AJ(1), Gao J, Brune M, Bush E, Wodka D, Vasudevan A, Judd AS, Mulhern M, 
Brodjian S, Dayton B, Shapiro R, Hernandez LE, Marsh KC, Sham HL, Collins CA, 
Kym PR.

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Disease Research, Abbott Laboratories, 100 Abbott Park Road, Abbott 
Park, IL 60064, USA. andrew.souers@abbott.com

Optimization of a high-throughput screening hit against melanin-concentrating 
hormone receptor 1 (MCHr1) led to the discovery of 
2-(4-benzyloxy-phenyl)-N-[1-(2-pyrrolidin-1-yl-ethyl)-1H-indazol-6-yl]acetamide 
(7a). This compound was found to be a high-affinity ligand for MCHr1 and a 
potent inhibitor of MCH-mediated Ca(2+) release, showed good plasma and CNS 
exposure upon oral dosing in diet-induced obese mice, and is the first reported 
MCHr1 antagonist that is efficacious upon oral dosing in a chronic model of 
weight loss.

DOI: 10.1021/jm0490890
PMID: 15743174 [Indexed for MEDLINE]61. J Med Chem. 2005 Apr 7;48(7):2274-7. doi: 10.1021/jm049035q.

Discovery of bicycloalkyl urea melanin concentrating hormone receptor 
antagonists: orally efficacious antiobesity therapeutics.

McBriar MD(1), Guzik H, Xu R, Paruchova J, Li S, Palani A, Clader JW, Greenlee 
WJ, Hawes BE, Kowalski TJ, O'Neill K, Spar B, Weig B.

Author information:
(1)Schering-Plough Research Institute, 2015 Galloping Hill Road, Kenilworth, New 
Jersey 07033-0539, USA. mark.mcbriar@spcorp.com

Melanin concentrating hormone (MCH) is involved in regulation of food intake and 
energy homeostasis. Antagonists of the MCH receptor are expected to affect food 
intake and weight gain, making MCH-R1 an attractive target for obesity 
treatment. Herein, we report the discovery of a novel, orally active series of 
MCH-R1 antagonists that exhibit in vivo efficacy in rodent obesity models.

DOI: 10.1021/jm049035q
PMID: 15801820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Endocrinology. 2005 Jul;146(7):3080-6. doi: 10.1210/en.2004-1150. Epub 2005
Apr  7.

Antiobesity effect of a melanin-concentrating hormone 1 receptor antagonist in 
diet-induced obese mice.

Mashiko S(1), Ishihara A, Gomori A, Moriya R, Ito M, Iwaasa H, Matsuda M, Feng 
Y, Shen Z, Marsh DJ, Bednarek MA, MacNeil DJ, Kanatani A.

Author information:
(1)Tsukuba Research Institute, Banyu Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Okubo 3, Tsukuba 
300-2611, Japan.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a cyclic orexigenic peptide expressed in 
the lateral hypothalamus, which plays an important role in regulating energy 
balance. To elucidate the physiological role of MCH in obesity development, the 
present study examined the effect of a selective MCH1 receptor (MCH1R) 
antagonist in the diet-induced obesity mouse model. The MCH1R antagonist has 
high affinity and selectivity for MCH-1R and potently inhibits 
intracerebroventricularly injected MCH-induced food intake in Sprague Dawley 
rats. Chronic intracerebroventricular infusion of the MCH1R antagonist (7.5 
microg/d) completely suppressed body weight gain in diet-induced obese mice 
during the treatment periods and significantly decreased cumulative food intake, 
by 14%. Carcass analysis showed that the MCH1R antagonist resulted in a 
selective decrease of body fat in the diet-induced obese mice. In addition, the 
MCH1R antagonist ameliorated the obesity-related hypercholesterolemia, 
hyperinsulinemia, hyperglycemia, and hyperleptinemia. These results indicate 
that MCH has a major role in the development of diet-induced obesity in mice and 
that a MCH1R antagonist might be a useful candidate as an antiobesity agent.

DOI: 10.1210/en.2004-1150
PMID: 15817671 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Brain Res. 2005 Apr 18;1041(2):117-24. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2004.11.066.

Melanin concentrating hormone (MCH): a novel neural pathway for regulation of 
GnRH neurons.

Williamson-Hughes PS(1), Grove KL, Smith MS.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neuroscience, Oregon National Primate Research Center, Oregon 
Health and Science University, Beaverton, OR 97006, USA.

The link between the state of energy balance and reproductive function is well 
known. Thus, signals denoting negative energy balance and the accompanying 
hyperphagic drive are likely to be factors in the suppression of gonadotropin 
releasing hormone (GnRH) activity. We have previously found that 
appetite-regulating systems, such as neuropeptide Y (NPY) in the arcuate nucleus 
(ARH) and orexin in the lateral hypothalamic area (LHA), send fiber projections 
that come in close apposition with GnRH neurons. Furthermore, the appropriate 
receptors, NPY Y5 and OR-1, respectively, are coexpressed on GnRH neurons, 
providing neuroanatomical evidence for a direct link between the NPY and orexin 
systems and GnRH neurons. Therefore, these orexigenic neuropeptide systems are 
potential candidates that convey information about energy balance to GnRH 
neurons. The current studies focused on melanin concentrating hormone (MCH), 
another orexigenic neuropeptide system located in the LHA that is sensitive to 
energy balance. The results showed that MCH fiber projections came in close 
apposition with approximately 85-90% of GnRH cell bodies throughout the preoptic 
area and anterior hypothalamic area in the rat. In addition, the MCH receptor 
(MCHR1) was coexpressed on about 50-55% of GnRH neurons. These findings present 
evidence for a possible direct neuroanatomical pathway by which MCH may play a 
role in the regulation of GnRH neuronal function. Thus, MCH is another potential 
signal that may serve to integrate energy balance and reproductive function.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2004.11.066
PMID: 15829220 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2005 May 16;15(10):2565-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2005.03.052.

Discovery of 4-(dimethylamino)quinazolines as potent and selective antagonists 
for the melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1.

Kanuma K(1), Omodera K, Nishiguchi M, Funakoshi T, Chaki S, Semple G, Tran TA, 
Kramer B, Hsu D, Casper M, Thomsen B, Beeley N, Sekiguchi Y.

Author information:
(1)Medicinal Research Laboratories, Taisho Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd, 1-403 
Yoshino-cho, Kita-ku, Saitama, Saitama 331-9530, Japan.

A series of 4-(dimethylamino)quinazoline based antagonists of the 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCH-R1) is described. This series was 
derived from a lead compound, AR129330, identified by HTS of a GPCR-directed 
library using a functional assay with a constitutively activated (CART) form of 
the receptor. The preliminary optimization resulted in the identification of 
compounds 20, 21, and 23.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2005.03.052
PMID: 15863317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Int J Mol Med. 2005 Jun;15(6):1033-9.

Melanin-concentrating hormone enhances sucrose intake.

Sakamaki R(1), Uemoto M, Inui A, Asakawa A, Ueno N, Ishibashi C, Hirono S, 
Yukioka H, Kato A, Shinfuku N, Kasuga M, Katsuura G.

Author information:
(1)International Center for Medical Research, Department of Clinical Molecular 
Medicine, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe, Japan.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is known to be an important regulator for 
feeding and energy balance. MCH was recently reported to stimulate water intake 
independent of food intake. The purpose of the present study is to examine the 
dipsogenic response of MCH with special emphasis on sweetened beverages, the 
preference for which is well documented in diabetic animals. Our results showed 
that intracerebroventricular injection of MCH acutely increased food as well as 
water intake. Human (h)MCH and salmon (s)MCH increased water intake independent 
of food intake, which was not suppressed by angiotensin antagonists. hMCH and 
sMCH significantly increased both sucrose solution and food intake; on the other 
hand, agouti-related protein (AgRP) stimulated food but not sucrose intake when 
provided simultaneously. MCH-treated rats significantly increased the ingestion 
of sucrose and glucose solution, but not of saccharin, indicating that 
MCH-induced dipsogenic response is more related to caloric content than sweet 
taste per se. Significant correlation was observed between the sucrose intake 
and the mRNA expression of MCH and MCHR1 in normal rats. These results indicate 
that MCH may be an important regulator of sugar intake in normal as well as in 
obese diabetic animals.

PMID: 15870910 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Endocrinology. 2005 Aug;146(8):3452-62. doi: 10.1210/en.2005-0115. Epub 2005
May  12.

Arginine residue 155 in the second intracellular loop plays a critical role in 
rat melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 activation.

Saito Y(1), Tetsuka M, Saito S, Imai K, Yoshikawa A, Doi H, Maruyama K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Saitama Medical School, 38 Moro-Hongo, 
Moroyama-cho, Iruma-gun, Saitama 350-0492, Japan. yumisait@saitama-med.ac.jp

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) receptor 1 (MCH1R) is a class A G 
protein-coupled receptor. The MCH system has been linked to a variety of 
physiological functions, including the regulation of feeding and energy 
metabolism. We recently reported the importance of a dibasic motif in the 
membrane-proximal C-terminal region for MCH1R function. Here we reveal that an 
Arg residue in intracellular loop 2 of MCH1R plays a critical role in receptor 
function. We analyzed the roles of two distinct motifs, BBXXB and BXBB (in which 
B is a basic residue and X is a nonbasic residue), located in the three 
intracellular loops of MCH1R. Triple-substitution mutants of intracellular loops 
1 and 3 could still activate calcium mobilization, albeit with lower efficacy or 
potency. However, mutations in intracellular loop 2 led to a complete loss of 
induction of signal transduction without changing the high affinity constant 
(Kd) value. By analyzing a series of single-substitution mutants, a point 
mutation of Arg155 in intracellular loop 2 was found to be responsible for the 
signaling pathway elicited by MCH. In addition, substitution at positions 
corresponding to Arg155 in human MCH receptor 2 and rat somatostatin receptor 2 
also markedly abolished their ligand-induced signaling capacities, indicating 
that this Arg is a recognition determinant in several G protein-coupled 
receptors.

DOI: 10.1210/en.2005-0115
PMID: 15890773 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2005 Jun 2;15(11):2752-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bmcl.2005.03.114.

Synthesis and evaluation of urea-based indazoles as melanin-concentrating 
hormone receptor 1 antagonists for the treatment of obesity.

Souers AJ(1), Gao J, Wodka D, Judd AS, Mulhern MM, Napier JJ, Brune ME, Bush EN, 
Brodjian SJ, Dayton BD, Shapiro R, Hernandez LE, Marsh KC, Sham HL, Collins CA, 
Kym PR.

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Disease Research, Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, IL 60064, USA. 
andrew.souers@abbott.com

A series of urea-based N-1-(2-aminoethyl)-indazoles was synthesized and 
evaluated for melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHr1) antagonism in 
both binding and functional assays. Several compounds that acted as MCHr1 
antagonists were identified, and optimization afforded a compound with excellent 
binding affinity, good functional potency, and oral efficacy in a chronic model 
for weight loss in diet-induced obese mice.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2005.03.114
PMID: 15911251 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Eur J Neurosci. 2005 May;21(10):2837-44. doi:
10.1111/j.1460-9568.2005.04100.x.

Disrupting the melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 in mice leads to 
cognitive deficits and alterations of NMDA receptor function.

Adamantidis A(1), Thomas E, Foidart A, Tyhon A, Coumans B, Minet A, Tirelli E, 
Seutin V, Grisar T, Lakaye B.

Author information:
(1)Research Center for Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology, University of Liège, 
17, Place Delcour, B-4020 Liège, Belgium.

In order to investigate the physiological properties of the 
melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) we have generated and used mice from which 
the MCH receptor 1 gene was deleted (MCHR1(Neo/Neo) mice). Complementary 
experimental approaches were used to investigate alterations in the learning and 
memory processes of our transgenic model. The ability of the knockout strain to 
carry out the inhibitory passive avoidance test was found to be considerably 
impaired although no significant differences were observed in anxiety levels. 
This impaired cognitive property prompted us to explore modifications in 
N-methyl D-aspartate (NMDA) responses in the hippocampus. Intracellular 
recordings of CA1 pyramidal neurons in hippocampal slices from the 
MCHR1(Neo/Neo) mice revealed significantly decreased NMDA responses. Finally, 
using in situ hybridization we found a 15% reduction in NMDAR1 subunit in the 
CA1 region. These results show for the first time a possible role for MCH in the 
control of the function of the NMDA receptor.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2005.04100.x
PMID: 15926931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Mol Endocrinol. 2005 Oct;19(10):2579-90. doi: 10.1210/me.2004-0301. Epub 2005
 May 31.

A point mutation in the human melanin concentrating hormone receptor 1 reveals 
an important domain for cellular trafficking.

Fan J(1), Perry SJ, Gao Y, Schwarz DA, Maki RA.

Author information:
(1)Neurocrine Biosciences, Inc., 12790 El Camino Real, San Diego, California 
92113, USA.

G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are heptahelical integral membrane proteins 
that require cell surface expression to elicit their effects. The lack of 
appropriate expression of GPCRs may be the underlying cause of a number of 
inherited disorders. There is evidence that newly synthesized GPCRs must attain 
a specific conformation for their correct trafficking to the cell surface. In 
this study, we show that a single point mutation in human melanin-concentrating 
hormone receptor (hMCHR1) at position 255 (T255A), which is located at the 
junction of intracellular loop 3 and transmembrane domain 6, reduces the hMCHR1 
cell surface expression level to 20% of that observed for the wild-type 
receptor. Most of these mutant receptors are located intracellularly, as opposed 
to the wild-type receptor, which is located primarily on the cell surface. 
Immunoprecipitation experiments show that hMCHR1-T255A has reduced glycosylation 
compared with the wild-type receptor and is associated with the chaperone 
protein, calnexin, and it colocalizes in the endoplasmic reticulum with 
KDEL-containing proteins. We also demonstrate that a cell-permeable small 
molecule antagonist of hMCHR1 can function as a pharmacological chaperone to 
restore cell surface expression of this and other MCHR1 mutants to wild-type 
levels. Once rescued, the T255A mutant couples to Gq proteins as efficiently as 
the wild-type receptor. These data suggest that this single mutation produces an 
hMCHR1 that folds incorrectly, resulting in its retention in the endoplasmic 
reticulum, but once rescued to the cell surface can still function normally.

DOI: 10.1210/me.2004-0301
PMID: 15928315 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Eur J Endocrinol. 2005 Jun;152(6):851-62. doi: 10.1530/eje.1.01917.

Mutation analysis of the MCHR1 gene in human obesity.

Wermter AK(1), Reichwald K, Büch T, Geller F, Platzer C, Huse K, Hess C, 
Remschmidt H, Gudermann T, Preibisch G, Siegfried W, Goldschmidt HP, Li WD, 
Price RA, Biebermann H, Krude H, Vollmert C, Wichmann HE, Illig T, Sørensen TI, 
Astrup A, Larsen LH, Pedersen O, Eberlé D, Clément K, Blundell J, Wabitsch M, 
Schäfer H, Platzer M, Hinney A, Hebebrand J.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Research Group, Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 
Rheinische Kliniken Essen, University of Duisburg-Essen, 45147 Essen, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: The importance of the melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) system for 
regulation of energy homeostasis and body weight has been demonstrated in 
rodents. We analysed the human MCH receptor 1 gene (MCHR1) with respect to human 
obesity.
DESIGN: This consisted of genomic screening of 13.4 kb encompassing the MCHR1 in 
extremely obese German children and adolescents and association analyses for two 
coding single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). To confirm initial positive 
association results, additional association studies and transmission 
disequilibrium tests in further German, Danish, French and American samples were 
conducted. Selected SNPs were investigated using functional in vitro studies and 
reporter gene assays.
METHODS: Single-stranded conformation polymorphism analysis, re-sequencing, 
PCR-restriction fragment length polymorphism analyses, tetra-primer 
amplification refractory mutation systems, matrix-assisted laser 
desorption/ionization time of flight mass spectrometry and reporter gene assays 
were carried out as well as measuring inositol phosphate formation, inhibition 
of cAMP formation and activation of p42/44 MAP kinase.
RESULTS: We identified 11 infrequent variations and two SNPs in the MCHR1 coding 
sequence and 18 SNPs (eight novel) in the flanking sequence. Association and 
transmission disequilibrium with obesity were detected for several SNPs in 
independent study groups of German obese children and adolescents and controls. 
In two German samples, encompassing 4056 and 295 individuals, trends towards 
association with obesity were detected. Findings in a second epidemiological 
German sample and in Danish, French and American samples were negative. 
Functional in vitro studies as well as reporter gene assays revealed no 
significant results.
CONCLUSION: Our initial association of MCHR1 alleles/haplotype detected might be 
related to juvenile-onset obesity, conditional on a particular genetic and/or 
environmental background. Alternatively, we could not exclude the possibility 
that the initially detected association represented a false positive finding.

DOI: 10.1530/eje.1.01917
PMID: 15941924 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2005 Sep 13;139(1):31-41. doi: 
10.1016/j.molbrainres.2005.05.005.

Immunohistochemical distribution of MIZIP and its co-expression with the 
Melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 in the adult rodent brain.

Francke F(1), Richter D, Bächner D.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Cell Biochemistry and Clinical Neurobiology, University 
Hospital Hamburg-Eppendorf, D-20246 Hamburg, Germany.

We have recently identified a Melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 
interacting zinc-finger protein (MIZIP) from a human brain cDNA library. Here, 
we report the generation of a specific antibody against MIZIP and its 
distribution in rodent tissues using immunoblotting and immunohistochemical 
techniques. MIZIP was detected as a 27 kDa protein in brain, liver, and skeletal 
muscle, and to a lower extend, in lung, testis, and heart. Subcellular 
fractionation of adult mouse brain revealed the presence of MIZIP and MCHR1 in 
the cytoplasmic, membrane, and synaptosomal fraction, but not in a postsynaptic 
density preparation. In cultured rat, embryonic hippocampal neurons MIZIP is 
somatodendritically localized. In the adult rodent brain, MIZIP is widely 
distributed. High levels of expression were detected in brain regions involved 
in olfaction, feeding behavior, sensorimotor integration, and learning and 
memory, for example, the olfactory bulb, the olfactory tubercle, the caudate 
putamen, the thalamus and hypothalamus, the nucleus accumbens, the cerebral 
cortex, the hippocampus formation, and the cerebellum. Co-expression of MIZIP 
and MCHR1 was observed, for example, in pyramidal neurons of the cerebral cortex 
and hippocampus, in neurons of the olivary nucleus, lateral hypothalamus, 
nucleus accumbens, caudate putamen, pontine, and mesencephalic trigeminal 
nucleus. However, there are also differences in the expression patterns, for 
example, high expression of MCHR1 was detected in the lateral habenula, but no 
expression of MIZIP. These data support the notion that MIZIP might interact 
with MCHR1 in a cell type specific manner in vivo, suggesting a role in the 
regulation of MCH signalling in distinct regions of the mammalian brain.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molbrainres.2005.05.005
PMID: 15950311 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2005 Jul 15;15(14):3412-6. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2005.05.023.

Identification of aminopiperidine benzamides as MCHr1 antagonists.

Vasudevan A(1), Verzal MK, Wodka D, Souers AJ, Blackburn C, Che JL, Lai S, 
Brodjian S, Falls DH, Dayton BD, Govek E, Daniels T, Geddes B, Marsh KC, 
Hernandez LE, Collins CA, Kym PR.

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Diseases Research, Global Pharmaceutical Research and Development, 
Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, IL 60064, USA. anil.vasudevan@abbott.com

The identification of a novel series of benzamide-containing MCHr1 antagonists 
is described. Compound 22 displayed moderate efficacy in a diet induced obesity 
mice model.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2005.05.023
PMID: 15950463 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2005 Jul 15;15(14):3439-45. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2005.05.015.

Synthesis and structure-activity relationships of biarylcarboxamide 
bis-aminopyrrolidine urea derived small-molecule antagonists of the 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptor-1 (MCH-R1).

Rowbottom MW(1), Vickers TD, Dyck B, Tamiya J, Zhang M, Zhao L, Grey J, 
Provencal D, Schwarz D, Heise CE, Mistry M, Fisher A, Dong T, Hu T, Saunders J, 
Goodfellow VS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Neurocrine Biosciences Inc., 12790 El 
Camino Real, San Diego, CA 92130, USA. mrowbottom@neurocrine.com

A novel series of bis-aminopyrrolidine ureas containing either a 
4-biphenylcarboxmide or 5-phenyl-2-thiophenecarboxamide group have been 
identified as potent and functional antagonists of the melanin-concentrating 
hormone receptor-1. Syntheses and SAR are described, which led to the discovery 
of compounds with high binding affinity (Ki = 1 nM) for the receptor. 
Preliminary in vitro metabolic stability data are also reported for key 
compounds.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2005.05.015
PMID: 15950467 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2005 Aug 15;15(16):3691-5. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2005.05.039.

Discovery and SAR of 4-amino-2-biarylbutylurea MCH 1 receptor antagonists 
through solid-phase parallel synthesis.

Guo T(1), Hunter RC, Gu H, Rokosz LL, Stauffer TM, Hobbs DW.

Author information:
(1)Pharmacopeia Drug Discovery, Inc., P.O. Box 5350, Princeton, NJ 08543-5350, 
USA. tguo@pharmacop.com

-4-Amino-2-arylbutylbenzamides such as 1 were identified as micromolar MCH 1 
receptor (MCH1R) antagonists via screening using a scintillation proximity assay 
based on [125I]-MCH binding to recombinant, human MCH1R. Subsequent lead 
optimization efforts using solid-phase parallel synthesis resulted in the 
defined structure-activity relationships and the identification of 
4-amino-2-biarylbutylureas, such as 11g, as potent single digit nanomolar MCH1R 
antagonists.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2005.05.039
PMID: 15953726 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2005 Aug 15;15(16):3696-700. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2005.05.085.

Discovery and SAR of biaryl piperidine MCH1 receptor antagonists through 
solid-phase encoded combinatorial synthesis.

Guo T(1), Shao Y, Qian G, Rokosz LL, Stauffer TM, Hunter RC, Babu SD, Gu H, 
Hobbs DW.

Author information:
(1)Pharmacopeia Drug Discovery, Inc., P.O. Box 5350, Princeton, NJ 08543-5350, 
USA. tguo@pharmacop.com

An encoded combinatorial library based on aryl and biaryl piperidine scaffolds 
was designed and synthesized. Screening of this library resulted in the 
discovery of high-nanomolar biaryl piperidine-based MCH1 receptor antagonists. 
Follow-up optimization using a parallel synthesis provided potent, single digit 
nanomolar antagonists.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2005.05.085
PMID: 15978811 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2006 Jan;31(1):112-20. doi: 10.1038/sj.npp.1300805.

Genetic inactivation of melanin-concentrating hormone receptor subtype 1 (MCHR1) 
in mice exerts anxiolytic-like behavioral effects.

Roy M(1), David NK, Danao JV, Baribault H, Tian H, Giorgetti M.

Author information:
(1)Amgen Inc., South San Francisco, CA, USA. roym@stanfordalumni.org

The biological effects of the melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) are mediated 
by the melanin concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1) in mice. This receptor 
is enriched in brain areas that are involved in the modulation of mood and 
affect, suggesting that MCH-dependent signaling may influence neurobiological 
mechanisms underlying fear and anxiety processes. To test this, we have 
generated mice lacking functional MCHR1 and characterized phenotypic traits 
using a number of behavioral tests. Mice carrying a null mutation of the MCHR1 
gene display anxiolytic-like behavior across a battery different behavioral 
paradigms commonly used to assess fear and anxiety responses in rodents: open 
field, elevated plus maze, social interaction, and stress-induced hyperthermia. 
The brain serotonin (5-HT) system is central to the control of mood- and 
anxiety-related processes. To examine the impact of MCHR1 receptor deletion on 
5-HT neurotransmission, we used in vivo microdialysis in freely moving knockout 
and wild-type mice. Baseline dialysate 5-HT levels were significantly lower in 
MCHR1 knockout mice as compared with wild-type controls (9.53+/-0.24 fmol for 
wild types vs 6.91+/-0.36 fmol for knockouts) in the prefrontal cortex (PFC), 
one of the main target structures of the serotonergic system and one that is 
highly associated with the control of emotional processes. Moreover, forced swim 
increased 5-HT efflux in the PFC of wild-type but not MCHR1 knockout mice. In 
summary, we show that MCHR1 can modulate stress- and anxiety-like behaviors and 
suggest that this may be due to changes in serotonergic transmission in 
forebrain regions.

Neuropsychopharmacology (2006) 31, 112-120. doi:10.1038/sj.npp.1300805; 
published online 29 June 2005.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.npp.1300805
PMID: 15988472 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2005 Sep 1;15(17):3853-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bmcl.2005.05.121.

Lead optimization of 4-(dimethylamino)quinazolines, potent and selective 
antagonists for the melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1.

Kanuma K(1), Omodera K, Nishiguchi M, Funakoshi T, Chaki S, Semple G, Tran TA, 
Kramer B, Hsu D, Casper M, Thomsen B, Sekiguchi Y.

Author information:
(1)Medicinal Research Laboratories, Taisho Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd., 1-403 
Yoshino-cho, Kita-ku, Saitama, Saitama 331-9530, Japan.

The optimization of a series of 4-(dimethylamino)quinazoline antagonists of the 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCH-R1) is described. The combination 
of the elaboration of both the linker portion and the terminal phenyl ring 
provided 
N-(cis-4-{[4-(dimethylamino)quinazolin-2-yl]amino}cyclohexyl)-3,4-difluorobenzamide 
hydrochloride 28 (ATC0175), which showed excellent antagonist activity at the 
MCH-R1 (IC50 = 3.4 nM) as well as good selectivity over the Y5 and the alpha2A 
receptors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2005.05.121
PMID: 16002290 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2005 Aug 15;15(16):3701-6. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2005.05.130.

1-(4-Amino-phenyl)-pyrrolidin-3-yl-amine and 
6-(3-amino-pyrrolidin-1-yl)-pyridin-3-yl-amine derivatives as 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptor-1 antagonists.

Huang CQ(1), Baker T, Schwarz D, Fan J, Heise CE, Zhang M, Goodfellow VS, 
Markison S, Gogas KR, Chen T, Wang XC, Zhu YF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Neurocrine Biosciences, Inc., 12790 El 
Camino Real, San Diego, CA 92130, USA.

Derivatives of 1-(4-amino-phenyl)-pyrrolidin-3-yl-amine and 
6-(3-amino-pyrrolidin-1-yl)-pyridin-3-yl-amine were identified as potent and 
functionally active MCH-R1 antagonists. One compound with Ki = 2.3 nM 
demonstrated good oral bioavailability (32%) and in vivo efficacy in rats.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2005.05.130
PMID: 16005225 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Med Chem. 2005 Jul 28;48(15):4746-9. doi: 10.1021/jm0503852.

Biaryl ureas as potent and orally efficacious melanin concentrating hormone 
receptor 1 antagonists for the treatment of obesity.

Palani A(1), Shapiro S, McBriar MD, Clader JW, Greenlee WJ, Spar B, Kowalski TJ, 
Farley C, Cook J, van Heek M, Weig B, O'neill K, Graziano M, Hawes B.

Author information:
(1)Schering-Plough Research Institute, 2015 Galloping Hill Road, Kenilworth, New 
Jersey 07033, USA. anandan.palani@spcorp.com

Herein, we report a small molecule MCH-R1 antagonist which demonstrates oral 
efficacy in chronic rodent models. Substituted phenyl biaryl urea derivatives 
were synthesized and evaluated as MCH-R1 antagonists for the treatment of 
obesity. The structure-activity relationship studies in this series resulted in 
identification of urea 1 as a potent and selective MCH-R1 antagonist. Compound 1 
exhibited oral efficacy in chronic (28 d) rodent models at 3-30 mpk showing 
significant reduction in food intake and weight gain relative to controls.

DOI: 10.1021/jm0503852
PMID: 16033253 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Sep 9;334(4):1292-8. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.07.027.

MYND domain specific interaction of the melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 
interacting zinc-finger protein with alpha- and beta-tubulin.

Francke F(1), Buck F, Bächner D.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Cell Biochemistry and Clinical Neurobiology, University 
Hospital Hamburg-Eppendorf, Martinistrasse 52, 20246 Hamburg, Germany.

MIZIP was originally identified as a highly conserved zinc-finger protein from 
human brain interacting with the C-terminus of the melanin-concentrating hormone 
receptor 1. However, the cellular functions of MIZIP are still not known. Here, 
we focussed on the identification of associated proteins using affinity 
purification from human cells. This resulted in the identification of alpha- and 
beta-tubulin. The interaction was confirmed in vitro and in vivo using GST 
pull-down and immunoprecipitation assays, and was mapped to the MYND zinc-finger 
of MIZIP and to the N-terminus of tubulin. Immunoprecipitation and 
immunocytochemistry analyses demonstrate that MIZIP binds to tubulin but not to 
cellular microtubules in vivo and that ectopic expression of MIZIP does not 
interfere with the overall structure of the microtubular cytoskeleton. Our 
results suggest that MIZIP might play an important role in mammalian cells by 
associating with tubulin and thus might provide a link between MCHR1 and tubulin 
functions.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.07.027
PMID: 16039987 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2005 Oct 1;15(19):4174-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bmcl.2005.06.089.

Identification of ortho-amino benzamides and nicotinamides as MCHr1 antagonists.

Vasudevan A(1), LaMarche MJ, Blackburn C, Che JL, Luchaco-Cullis CA, Lai S, 
Marsilje TH, Patane MA, Souers AJ, Wodka D, Geddes B, Chen S, Brodjian S, Falls 
DH, Dayton BD, Bush E, Brune M, Shapiro RD, Marsh KC, Hernandez LE, Sham HL, 
Collins CA, Kym PR.

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Diseases Research, Global Pharmaceutical Research and Development, 
Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, IL 60064, USA. Anil.Vasudevan@abbott.com

Several potent and efficacious MCHr1 antagonists containing an ortho-amino 
benzamide or nicotinamide chemotype have been identified, exemplified by 28 and 
50.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2005.06.089
PMID: 16085414 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


82. J Med Chem. 2005 Sep 8;48(18):5684-97. doi: 10.1021/jm050103y.

6-Acylamino-2-aminoquinolines as potent melanin-concentrating hormone 1 receptor 
antagonists. Identification, structure-activity relationship, and investigation 
of binding mode.

Ulven T(1), Frimurer TM, Receveur JM, Little PB, Rist O, Nørregaard PK, Högberg 
T.

Author information:
(1)7TM Pharma A/S, Fremtidsvej 3, DK-2970 Hørsholm, Denmark.

Novel 6-acylamino-2-aminoquinoline melanin-concentrating hormone 1 receptor 
(MCH1R) antagonists were identified by sequential in silico screening with 3D 
pharmacophore models derived from a series of benzamide antagonists. The 
structure-activity relationship exploration by synthesis of analogues found 
structural demands around the western part of the compounds to be quite 
specific, whereas much structural freedom was found in the eastern part. While 
these compounds in general suffered from poor solubility properties, the 
4-trifluoromethoxyphenoxyacetamide western appendage provided a favorable 
combination of activity and solubility properties. The amine in the eastern 
appendage, originally required by the pharmacophore model and believed to 
interact with Asp123 in transmembrane 3 of MCH1R, could be removed without 
diminishing affinity or functional activity of the compounds. Docking studies 
suggested that the Asp123 interacts preferentially with the nitrogen of the 
central quinoline. Synthesis and testing of specific analogues supported our 
revised binding mode hypothesis.

DOI: 10.1021/jm050103y
PMID: 16134937 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Med Chem. 2005 Sep 22;48(19):5888-91. doi: 10.1021/jm050598r.

Discovery and characterization of aminopiperidinecoumarin melanin concentrating 
hormone receptor 1 antagonists.

Kym PR(1), Iyengar R, Souers AJ, Lynch JK, Judd AS, Gao J, Freeman J, Mulhern M, 
Zhao G, Vasudevan A, Wodka D, Blackburn C, Brown J, Che JL, Cullis C, Lai SJ, 
LaMarche MJ, Marsilje T, Roses J, Sells T, Geddes B, Govek E, Patane M, Fry D, 
Dayton BD, Brodjian S, Falls D, Brune M, Bush E, Shapiro R, Knourek-Segel V, Fey 
T, McDowell C, Reinhart GA, Preusser LC, Marsh K, Hernandez L, Sham HL, Collins 
CA.

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Disease Research, Abbott Laboratories, 100 Abbott Park Road, Abbott 
Park, Illinois 60064, USA. phil.r.kym@abbott.com

4-(1-Benzo[1,3]dioxol-5-ylmethylpiperidine-4-ylmethyl)-6-chlorochromen-2-one (7) 
is a potent, orally bioavailable melanin concentrating hormone receptor 1 
(MCHr1) antagonist that causes dose-dependent weight loss in diet-induced obese 
mice. Further evaluation of 7 in an anesthetized dog model of cardiovascular 
safety revealed adverse hemodynamic effects at a plasma concentration comparable 
to the minimally effective therapeutic concentration. These results highlight 
the need for scrutiny of the cardiovascular safety profile of MCHr1 antagonists.

DOI: 10.1021/jm050598r
PMID: 16161992 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Diabetes. 2005 Oct;54(10):3049-55. doi: 10.2337/diabetes.54.10.3049.

Association of melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 5' polymorphism with 
early-onset extreme obesity.

Bell CG(1), Meyre D, Samson C, Boyle C, Lecoeur C, Tauber M, Jouret B, Jaquet D, 
Levy-Marchal C, Charles MA, Weill J, Gibson F, Mein CA, Froguel P, Walley AJ.

Author information:
(1)Section of Genomic Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College, 
Hammersmith Hospital, London W12 0NN, UK.

Murine models have been highly effective in identifying the monogenic forms of 
human obesity discovered to date. Melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 
(MCHR1) has been shown to be significant in the downstream orexigenic activity 
of the leptin-melanocortin pathway by such models. In this study, the human 
MCHR1 gene was extensively characterized by sequencing 3.5 kb of coding, 
untranslated and intronic regions plus 1 kb of putative promoter region in 180 
morbidly obese adults and 87 morbidly obese children, a total of >2.4 Mb of 
sequencing. Thirty-nine single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were found, seven 
of which encode an amino acid change. One mutation, R248Q, appeared to 
cosegregate with the obesity trait in one pedigree but was also found to be a 
rare polymorphism in control samples. To investigate the possible polygenic role 
of MCHR1, the six common SNPs (minor allele frequency >5%) found in the 
sequenced regions were then screened in 557 morbidly obese adults, 552 obese 
children, and 1,195 nonobese nondiabetic control subjects. The plausible 
promoter SNP, rs133068, was found to be associated with protection against 
obesity in obese children only (allele frequency P = 0.006 and genotype 
frequency P = 0.004). Most significant results were found when using a dominant 
model (P = 0.001, odds ratio 0.695 [95% CI 0.560-0.863]). However, similar 
associations were found when both adults and children were analyzed together (P 
= 0.006, 0.783 [0.658-0.930]), suggesting that severe forms of obesity with 
early onset may be associated with SNPs in MCHR1.

DOI: 10.2337/diabetes.54.10.3049
PMID: 16186414 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2005 Dec 1;15(23):5234-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bmcl.2005.08.043.  Epub 2005 Oct 3.

Biaryl diamides as potent melanin concentrating hormone receptor 1 antagonists.

Palani A(1), Shapiro S, McBriar MD, Clader JW, Greenlee WJ, O'Neill K, Hawes B.

Author information:
(1)Schering-Plough Research Institute, 2015 Galloping Hill Road, Kenilworth, NJ 
07033, USA. anandan.palani@spcorp.com

Herein, we report the discovery of the potent and selective biaryl diamide 
derived MCH-R1 receptor antagonist 1, which was identified upon modification of 
a previously disclosed biaryl urea series. This paper describes one of the 
strategies incorporated to remove the highly mutagenic biarylaniline present in 
an otherwise promising biaryl urea series.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2005.08.043
PMID: 16202583 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2005 Dec 1;15(23):5293-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bmcl.2005.08.049.  Epub 2005 Oct 3.

Aminopiperidine indazoles as orally efficacious melanin concentrating hormone 
receptor-1 antagonists.

Vasudevan A(1), Souers AJ, Freeman JC, Verzal MK, Gao J, Mulhern MM, Wodka D, 
Lynch JK, Engstrom KM, Wagaw SH, Brodjian S, Dayton B, Falls DH, Bush E, Brune 
M, Shapiro RD, Marsh KC, Hernandez LE, Collins CA, Kym PR.

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Diseases Research, Global Pharmaceutical Research and Development, 
Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, IL 60064, USA. Anil.Vasudevan@abbott.com

The synthesis and biological evaluation of novel 3-amino indazole melanin 
concentrating hormone receptor-1 antagonists are reported, several of which 
demonstrated functional activity of less than 100nM. Compounds 19 and 28, two of 
the more potent compounds identified in this study, were characterized by high 
exposure in the brain and demonstrated robust efficacy when dosed in 
diet-induced obese mice.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2005.08.049
PMID: 16203136 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2006 Jun;31(6):1135-45. doi: 10.1038/sj.npp.1300913.

Melanin-concentrating hormone-1 receptor modulates neuroendocrine, behavioral, 
and corticolimbic neurochemical stress responses in mice.

Smith DG(1), Davis RJ, Rorick-Kehn L, Morin M, Witkin JM, McKinzie DL, Nomikos 
GG, Gehlert DR.

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Discovery Research, Lilly Research Laboratories, Eli Lilly and 
Company, Indianapolis, IN 46285, USA. dgs@lundbeck.com

Repeated exposure to stressful conditions is linked to the etiology of affective 
disorders. The melanin-concentrating hormone-1 receptor (MCHR1) may be a novel 
mechanism that is involved in the modulation of stress responses and affective 
states. The role of MCHR1 in neuroendocrine, behavioral, and neurochemical 
stress, and anxiety-related responses was examined by monitoring the effects of 
melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) and the selective MCHR1 antagonist, GW3430, 
in inbred C57Bl/6NTac and MCHR1-knockout (KO) and wild-type (WT) mice. 
Intracerebroventricular injection of MCH increased plasma corticosterone, and 
produced anxiety-related responses in the elevated plus maze. The selective 
MCHR1 antagonist, GW3430, blocked the neuroendocrine and behavioral effects of 
MCH and produced anxiolytic-like effects by itself in animal models of anxiety. 
Moreover, KO mice had an anxiolytic-like phenotype in behavioral models of 
anxiety, and GW3430 had anxiolytic-like effects in WT, but not KO mice. Lastly, 
stressor-evoked acetylcholine release within the prefrontal cortex of inbred and 
WT mice, but not KO mice, was blocked by GW3430. We show that MCH elicits 
anxiety-like responses and that the effects of a selective MCHR1 antagonist and 
the phenotype of KO mice are consistent with anxiolytic-like action. Distinct 
behavioral, physiological, and neurochemical stress, and anxiety-related 
responses were selectively modulated by the MCHR1, and these actions may involve 
corticolimbic regulation of stress responsivity and anxiety.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.npp.1300913
PMID: 16205780 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


88. IDrugs. 2005 Nov;8(11):884-6.

American Chemical Society 230th National Meeting. Hormone receptor modulators 
and antiviral agents.

Perry L(1), Ognjenovic M.

Author information:
(1)Thomson Scientific, Middlesex House, London, UK. Letitia.Perry@thomson.com

PMID: 16254776 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Brain Res. 2005 Nov 16;1062(1-2):32-8. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2005.09.005.
Epub  2005 Oct 28.

Effects of MCH and a MCH1-receptor antagonist on (palatable) food and water 
intake.

Morens C(1), Nørregaard P, Receveur JM, van Dijk G, Scheurink AJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroendocrinology, University of Groningen, P.O. Box 14, 9750 
AA Haren, The Netherlands.

Melanin concentrating hormone (MCH) is a regulator of ingestive behavior, but 
several issues regarding its effects on specific components of ingestive 
behavior remain to be elucidated. Therefore, we injected, in the 3rd ventricle 
of male Wistar rats, saline, MCH (5 microg), MCH (5 mug) together with a MCH1-R 
antagonist (A, 10 microg) and the antagonist alone (A, 10 microg). Our results 
show that (1) central administration of MCH stimulates food intake (lab chow and 
medium high fat diet) and this can be blocked by a MCH1-R antagonist; (2) the 
MCH-induced increase in food intake is mediated through increased meal number, 
meal duration and meal size; (3) the MCH1-R antagonist is able to significantly 
reduce the intake of a highly palatable food (condensed sweet milk) and is more 
effective in blocking MCH-induced food intake when rats are fed a palatable 
medium high fat food; and (4) MCH stimulated water intake independently from and 
disproportionately to food intake. In conclusion, our results point to an 
involvement of endogenous MCH in the enhanced intake of palatable food. 
Furthermore, they confirm that MCH stimulates not only food intake but also 
water intake.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2005.09.005
PMID: 16257393 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Neuroscience. 2006;137(4):1405-15. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2005.10.057.
Epub  2005 Dec 15.

Feeding-dependent depression of melanin-concentrating hormone and 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptor-1 expression in vagal afferent neurones.

Burdyga G(1), Varro A, Dimaline R, Thompson DG, Dockray GJ.

Author information:
(1)Physiological Laboratory, School of Biomedical Sciences, University of 
Liverpool, Crown Street, Liverpool L69 3BX, UK.

Food intake is regulated by signals from the gastrointestinal tract. Both 
stimulation and inhibition of food intake may be mediated by upper 
gastrointestinal tract hormones, e.g. ghrelin and cholecystokinin that act at 
least partly via vagal afferent neurones. We now report that vagal afferent 
neurones in both rat and man express melanin-concentrating hormone and its 
receptor, melanin-concentrating hormone-1R. In nodose ganglia from rats fasted 
for 24 h, RT-PCR revealed the expression of both melanin-concentrating hormone 
and melanin-concentrating hormone-1R, whereas in ganglia from animals fed ad 
libitum expression was virtually undetectable. Immunohistochemical studies also 
revealed expression of melanin-concentrating hormone and melanin-concentrating 
hormone-1R in nodose ganglion neurones of fasted rats, but signals were weak in 
rats fed ad libitum. Melanin-concentrating hormone and melanin-concentrating 
hormone-1R were expressed in the same neurones, a high proportion of which also 
expressed the cholecystokinin-1 receptor. When fasted rats were refed, there was 
down-regulation of melanin-concentrating hormone and melanin-concentrating 
hormone-1R expression over a period of 5 h. Similar effects were produced by 
administration of cholecystokinin to fasted rats. The cholecystokinin-1 receptor 
antagonist lorglumide inhibited food-induced down-regulation of 
melanin-concentrating hormone and melanin-concentrating hormone-1R. We conclude 
that the satiety hormone cholecystokinin acts on vagal afferent neurones to 
inhibit expression of melanin-concentrating hormone and its receptor. Since the 
melanin-concentrating hormone system is associated with stimulation of food 
intake this effect of cholecystokinin may contribute to its action as a satiety 
hormone.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2005.10.057
PMID: 16359819 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Bioorg Med Chem. 2006 May 15;14(10):3307-19. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2005.12.052. 
Epub 2006 Jan 24.

Identification of 4-amino-2-cyclohexylaminoquinazolines as metabolically stable 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 antagonists.

Kanuma K(1), Omodera K, Nishiguchi M, Funakoshi T, Chaki S, Nagase Y, Iida I, 
Yamaguchi J, Semple G, Tran TA, Sekiguchi Y.

Author information:
(1)Medicinal Research Laboratories, Taisho Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd, 1-403 
Yoshino-cho, Kita-ku, Saitama, Saitama 331-9530, Japan.

The optimization of the distance between two key pharmacophore features within 
our first hit compounds 1a and 2a led to the identification of a new class of 
potent non-peptidic antagonists for the MCH-R1, based around 
4-amino-2-cyclohexylaminoquinazolines. In particular, ATC0065 (2c), 
N2-[cis-4-([2-[4-Bromo-2-(trifluoromethoxy)phenyl]ethyl]amino)cyclohexyl]-N4,N4-dimethylquinazoline-2,4-diamine 
dihydrochloride, bound with high affinity to the MCH-R1 (IC50 value of 16 nM) 
and showed good metabolic stability in liver microsomes from human and rat.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmc.2005.12.052
PMID: 16434202 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Neuroendocrinol. 2006 Mar;18(3):157-67. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2826.2005.01397.x.

Evidence for a stimulatory action of melanin-concentrating hormone on 
luteinising hormone release involving MCH1 and melanocortin-5 receptors.

Murray JF(1), Hahn JD, Kennedy AR, Small CJ, Bloom SR, Haskell-Luevano C, Coen 
CW, Wilson CA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Physiology and Clinical Developmental 
Sciences; O&G, St George's University of London, London, UK.

The present series of studies aimed to further our understanding of the role of 
melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) neurones in the central regulation of 
luteinising hormone (LH) release in the female rat. LH release was stimulated 
when MCH was injected bilaterally into the rostral preoptic area (rPOA) or 
medial preoptic area (mPOA), but not when injected into the zona incerta (ZI), 
of oestrogen-primed ovariectomised rats. In rats that were steroid-primed to 
generate a surge-like release of LH, MCH administration into the ZI blocked this 
rise in LH release: no such effect occurred when MCH was injected into the rPOA 
or mPOA. In vitro, MCH stimulated gonadotrophin-releasing hormone (GnRH) release 
from hypothalamic explants. Double-label immunohistochemistry showed 
GnRH-immunoreactive neurones in the vicinity of and intermingled with 
immunoreactive MCH processes. MCH is the endogenous ligand of the MCH type 1 
receptor (MCH1-R). Previously, we have shown a role for melanocortin-5 receptors 
(MC5-R) in the stimulatory action of MCH, so we next investigated the 
involvement of both MCH1-R and/or MC5-R in mediating the actions of MCH on GnRH 
and hence LH release. The stimulatory action of MCH in the rPOA was inhibited by 
administration of antagonists for either MCH1-R or MC5-R. However, in the mPOA, 
the action of MCH was blocked only by the MC5-R antagonist. LH release was 
stimulated by an agonist for MC5-R injected into the rPOA or mPOA; this was 
blocked by the MC5-R antagonist but not the MCH1-R antagonist. These results 
indicate that both MCH1-R and MC5-R are involved in the central control of LH 
release by MCH.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2826.2005.01397.x
PMID: 16454799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Chem Biol Drug Des. 2006 Feb;67(2):174-6. doi:
10.1111/j.1747-0285.2006.00341.x.

The use of three-dimensional shape and electrostatic similarity searching in the 
identification of a melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 antagonist.

Muchmore SW(1), Souers AJ, Akritopoulou-Zanze I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Structural Biology, Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, IL 60048, 
USA. steve.w.muchmore@abbott.com

To aid in the identification of novel melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 
(MCHr1) antagonists, a unique virtual library of readily synthesized molecules 
was designed and assembled based on 323 monomer compounds containing reactive 
moieties in combination with 30 core molecules having diamine functionality. The 
resulting library of 3,129,870 molecules was searched using three-dimensional 
shape similarity measures that were complimented with a novel electrostatic 
distribution similarity-matching algorithm. One of the top scoring hits in this 
library was synthesized and characterized for MCHr1 antagonism, where it 
exhibited at least a threefold improvement in binding affinity and cellular 
potency relative to the parent MCHr1 ligand. This work demonstrates that the use 
of shape and electrostatic similarity matching in combination with a 
well-designed virtual library can be used to augment standard medicinal 
chemistry techniques.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1747-0285.2006.00341.x
PMID: 16492165 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Pharmacol Toxicol Methods. 2006 May-Jun;53(3):272-6. doi: 
10.1016/j.vascn.2006.01.003. Epub 2006 Feb 24.

Development of a vacuum filtration system for the conventional microplate 
washer.

Lee S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Informatics, Sangmyung University, San 98-20, 
Anseo-Dong, Cheonan 330-720, Republic of Korea. lees@smu.ac.kr

INTRODUCTION: Filter plates are available from many vendors reflecting the 
growth of their scientific applications in various fields, however, the 
heterogeneous nature of those applications are the major factor to block the 
expansion of various filter plate options in a research scale operation. The 
development of an automatic vacuum filtration system for a conventional plate 
washer was presented as a possible solution for the filtration process in filter 
plate applications, especially in the melanin concentrating hormone receptor 
subtype 1 (MCH1) receptor binding assay with the time resolved fluorescence 
technology.
METHODS: The pilot modification was done in the Embla 96/384 well washer by 
replacing the original plate carriage with a new carriage mimicking the 
conventional vacuum manifold to add the function of flow-through vacuum 
filtration for filter plates. The performance of new vacuum filtration system 
was evaluated with MCH1 receptor binding assay and ligand washout experiments.
RESULTS: The mean background values from ligand washout experiments in AcroWell 
filter plates were 6406+/-502.9 with a manual vacuum manifold and 5563+/-585.8 
with the vacuum filtration system. Z' factors were calculated as 0.6101+/-0.095 
for the MCH1 receptor binding assay with the vacuum filtration system.
DISCUSSION: The new plate carriage for a conventional plate washer was developed 
for filter plate applications to enable its use in a flow-through vacuum 
filtration application in addition to the conventional plate washing by an 
aspiration. The results from ligand washout and receptor binding assay suggest 
that the vacuum filtration system can provide a cost-effective solution for 
filter plate applications and may alleviate the most common problems of those 
heterogeneous assays to develop as high throughput operations without major 
investments for the professional workstations.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vascn.2006.01.003
PMID: 16503172 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Diabetes. 2006 Mar;55(3):725-33. doi: 10.2337/diabetes.55.03.06.db05-1302.

Melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 deficiency increases insulin 
sensitivity in obese leptin-deficient mice without affecting body weight.

Bjursell M(1), Gerdin AK, Ploj K, Svensson D, Svensson L, Oscarsson J, Snaith M, 
Törnell J, Bohlooly-Y M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Gothenburg University, Sweden. 
mikael.bjursell@astrazeneca.com

The hypothalamic peptide melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) plays important 
roles in energy homeostasis. Animals overexpressing MCH develop hyperphagia, 
obesity, and insulin resistance. In this study, mice lacking both the MCH 
receptor-1 (MCHr1 knockout) and leptin (ob/ob) double-null mice (MCHr1 knockout 
ob/ob) were generated to investigate whether the obesity and/or the insulin 
resistance linked to the obese phenotype of ob/ob mice was attenuated by 
ablation of the MCHr1 gene. In MCHr1 knockout ob/ob mice an oral glucose load 
resulted in a lower blood glucose response and markedly lower insulin levels 
compared with the ob/ob mice despite no differences in body weight, food intake, 
or energy expenditure. In addition, MCHr1 knockout ob/ob mice had higher 
locomotor activity and lean body mass, lower body fat mass, and altered body 
temperature regulation compared with ob/ob mice. In conclusion, MCHr1 is 
important for insulin sensitivity and/or secretion via a mechanism not dependent 
on decreased body weight.

DOI: 10.2337/diabetes.55.03.06.db05-1302
PMID: 16505236 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2006 May 15;16(10):2621-7. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2006.02.044. Epub 2006 Mar 9.

Identification and characterization of amino-piperidinequinolones and 
quinazolinones as MCHr1 antagonists.

Blackburn C(1), LaMarche MJ, Brown J, Che JL, Cullis CA, Lai S, Maguire M, 
Marsilje T, Geddes B, Govek E, Kadambi V, Doherty C, Dayton B, Brodjian S, Marsh 
KC, Collins CA, Kym PR.

Author information:
(1)Millennium Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 40 Landsdowne St. Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. 
chris.blackburn@mpi.com

Several potent, functionally active MCHr1 antagonists derived from 
quinolin-2(1H)-ones and quinazoline-2(1H)-ones have been synthesized and 
evaluated. Pyridylmethyl substitution at the quinolone 1-position results in 
derivatives with low-nM binding potency and good selectivity with respect to 
hERG binding.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2006.02.044
PMID: 16524729 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2006;38(8):1290-9. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2006.01.007.  Epub 2006 Feb 17.

Characterization of a neuronal cell line expressing native human 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1).

Fry D(1), Dayton B, Brodjian S, Ogiela C, Sidorowicz H, Frost LJ, McNally T, 
Reilly RM, Collins CA.

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Disease Research, Global Pharmaceutical Products Division, Abbott 
Laboratories, Abbott Park, IL 60064, United States. dennis.fry@abbott.com

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH), an orexigenic neuropeptide in mammals, 
activates a G-protein coupled receptor, MCHR1. It is expected that antagonists 
of MCHR1 function will prove therapeutically useful as anti-obesity agents. 
Intracellular signaling by MCHR1 has been investigated primarily using 
non-neural cell lines expressing the recombinant receptor, in which MCHR1 has 
been shown to couple to G alpha(i/o) and G alpha(q) G-proteins. While these cell 
lines have been widely utilized to discover and optimize small molecule 
antagonists, it is unknown whether the intracellular signaling pathways in these 
cells accurately reflect those in neurons. Thus, we sought to develop a neurally 
derived cell line endogenously expressing MCHR1. IMR32, a human neuroblastoma 
cell line, has been shown to express MCHR1 mRNA; however, we were unable to 
detect either MCH-binding or MCH-stimulated Ca++-mobilization in these cells. 
Following transfection of IMR32 cells with a plasmid encoding human G alpha(16) 
G-protein, we isolated a cell line, I3.4.2, which responded to MCH in 
Ca++-mobilization assays. We found that the expression level of MCHR1 mRNA in 
I3.4.2 cells was 2000-fold higher than in the parent cell line. Using [125I]MCH 
saturation-binding to I3.4.2 cell membranes, we estimated the Bmax as 0.72 
pmol/mg protein and the Kd as 0.35 nM. We report that Ca++-mobilization in 
I3.4.2 cells was insensitive to pertussis toxin (Ptx) treatment, indicating that 
signaling was via G alpha(q) G-proteins. Furthermore, negative results in cAMP 
accumulation assays confirmed the lack of signaling via the G alpha(i/o) 
G-proteins. Our results suggest that the I3.4.2 cell line may be useful for 
characterization of MCHR1 activity in a neural-derived cell line.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biocel.2006.01.007
PMID: 16524757 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Eur J Pharmacol. 2006 Mar 27;535(1-3):182-91. doi:
10.1016/j.ejphar.2006.01.062.  Epub 2006 Mar 13.

Effects of a selective melanin-concentrating hormone 1 receptor antagonist on 
food intake and energy homeostasis in diet-induced obese mice.

Kowalski TJ(1), Spar BD, Weig B, Farley C, Cook J, Ghibaudi L, Fried S, O'Neill 
K, Del Vecchio RA, McBriar M, Guzik H, Clader J, Hawes BE, Hwa J.

Author information:
(1)Department of CV/Metabolic Diseases, Schering-Plough Research Institute, 
Kenilworth, NJ 07033, USA. timothy.kowalski@spcorp.com

Melanin concentrating hormone (MCH) is a cyclic neuropeptide expressed in the 
lateral hypothalamus that plays an important role in energy homeostasis. To 
investigate the pharmacological consequences of inhibiting MCH signaling in 
murine obesity models, we examined the effect of acute and chronic 
administration of a selective MCH1 receptor antagonist (SCH-A) in diet-induced 
obese (DIO) and Lep(ob/ob) mice. Oral administration of SCH-A for 5 consecutive 
days (30 mg/kg q.d.) produced hypophagia, a loss of body weight and adiposity, 
and decreased plasma leptin levels in DIO mice, and hypophagia and reduced 
weight gain in Lep(ob/ob) mice. Chronic administration of SCH-A to DIO mice 
decreased food intake, body weight and adiposity, and plasma leptin and free 
fatty acids. These effects were accompanied by increases in several hypothalamic 
neuropeptides. Acute administration of SCH-A (30 mg/kg) prevented the decrease 
in energy expenditure associated with food restriction. These results indicate 
that MCH1 receptor antagonists may be effective in the treatment of obesity.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2006.01.062
PMID: 16540104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


99. J Med Chem. 2006 Apr 6;49(7):2294-310. doi: 10.1021/jm050886n.

Discovery of orally efficacious melanin-concentrating hormone receptor-1 
antagonists as antiobesity agents. Synthesis, SAR, and biological evaluation of 
bicyclo[3.1.0]hexyl ureas.

McBriar MD(1), Guzik H, Shapiro S, Paruchova J, Xu R, Palani A, Clader JW, Cox 
K, Greenlee WJ, Hawes BE, Kowalski TJ, O'neill K, Spar BD, Weig B, Weston DJ, 
Farley C, Cook J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical Research and Department of Cardiovascular and 
Metabolic Diseases, Schering-Plough Research Institute, 2015 Galloping Hill 
Road, Kenilworth, New Jersey 07033-0539, USA. mark.mcbriar@spcorp.com

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a cyclic, nonadecapeptide expressed in 
the CNS of all vertebrates that regulates feeding behavior and energy 
homeostasis via interaction with the central melanocortin system. Regulation of 
this interaction results in modulation of food intake and body weight gain, 
demonstrating significant therapeutic potential for the treatment of obesity. 
The MCH-1 receptor (MCH-R1) has been identified as a key target in MCH 
regulation, as small molecule antagonists of MCH-R1 have demonstrated activity 
in vivo. Herein, we document our research in a bicyclo[3.1.0]hexyl urea series 
with particular emphasis on structure-activity relationships and optimization of 
receptor occupancy, measured both in vitro and via an ex vivo binding assay 
following an oral dosing regimen. Several compounds have been tested in vivo and 
exhibit oral efficacy in relevant acute rodent feeding models. In particular, 
24u has proven efficacious in chronic rodent models of obesity, showing a 
statistically significant reduction in food intake and body weight over a 28 day 
study.

DOI: 10.1021/jm050886n
PMID: 16570926 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Med Chem. 2006 Apr 6;49(7):2339-52. doi: 10.1021/jm0512286.

Screening for cardiovascular safety: a structure-activity approach for guiding 
lead selection of melanin concentrating hormone receptor 1 antagonists.

Kym PR(1), Souers AJ, Campbell TJ, Lynch JK, Judd AS, Iyengar R, Vasudevan A, 
Gao J, Freeman JC, Wodka D, Mulhern M, Zhao G, Wagaw SH, Napier JJ, Brodjian S, 
Dayton BD, Reilly RM, Segreti JA, Fryer RM, Preusser LC, Reinhart GA, Hernandez 
L, Marsh KC, Sham HL, Collins CA, Polakowski JS.

Author information:
(1)Global Pharmaceutical Research and Development, Abbott Laboratories, 100 
Abbott Park Road, Abbott Park, Illinois 60064, USA. phil.kym@abbott.com

An inactin-anesthetized rat cardiovascular (CV) assay was employed in a 
screening mode to triage multiple classes of melanin-concentrating hormone 
receptor 1 (MCHr1) antagonists. Lead identification was based on a compound 
profile producing high drug concentration in both plasma (>40 microM) and brain 
(>20 microg/g) with <15% change in cardiovascular endpoints. As a result of 
these stringent requirements, lead optimization activities on multiple classes 
of MCHr1 antagonists were terminated. After providing evidence that the 
cardiovascular liabilities were not a function of MCHr1 antagonism, continued 
screening identified the chromone-substituted aminopiperidine amides as a class 
of MCHr1 antagonists that demonstrated a safe cardiovascular profile at high 
drug concentrations in both plasma and brain. The high incidence of adverse 
cardiovascular effects associated with an array of MCHr1 antagonists of 
significant chemical diversity, combined with the stringent safety requirements 
for antiobesity drugs, highlight the importance of incorporating cardiovascular 
safety assessment early in the lead selection process.

DOI: 10.1021/jm0512286
PMID: 16570930 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2006 May;290(5):E982-8. doi: 
10.1152/ajpendo.00138.2005.

Melanin-concentrating hormone stimulates human growth hormone secretion: a novel 
effect of MCH on the hypothalamic-pituitary axis.

Segal-Lieberman G(1), Rubinfeld H, Glick M, Kronfeld-Schor N, Shimon I.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Endocrinology, Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer, Israel 52621. 
gabriella.lieberman@sheba.health.gov.il

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH), a 19-amino acid orexigenic 
(appetite-stimulating) hypothalamic peptide, is an important regulator of energy 
homeostasis. It is cleaved from its precursor prepro-MCH (ppMCH) along with 
several other neuropeptides whose roles are not fully defined. Because pituitary 
hormones such as growth hormone (GH), ACTH, and thyroid-stimulating hormone 
affect body weight and composition, appetite, insulin sensitivity, and 
lipoprotein metabolism, we investigated whether MCH exerts direct effects on the 
human pituitary to regulate energy balance using dispersed human fetal 
pituitaries (21-22 wk gestation) and cultured GH-secreting adenomas. We found 
that MCH receptor-1 (MCH-R1), but not MCH receptor-2, is expressed in both 
normal (fetal and adult) human pituitary tissues and in GH cell adenomas. MCH 
(10 nM) stimulated GH release from human fetal pituitary cultures by up to 62% 
during a 4-h incubation (P < 0.05). Interestingly, neuropeptide EI (10 nM), 
which is also cleaved from ppMCH, increased human GH secretion by up to 124% in 
fetal pituitaries. A milder, albeit significant, induction of GH secretion by 
MCH (20%) was seen in cultured GH-secreting pituitary adenomas. A comparable 
stimulation of GH secretion was seen when cultured mouse pituitary cells were 
treated with MCH. Treatment of cultured GH adenoma cells with MCH (100 nM) 
induced extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1 and 2 phosphorylation, 
suggesting activation of MCH-R1. In aggregate, these data suggest that MCH may 
regulate pituitary GH secretion and imply a potential cross-talk mechanism 
between appetite-regulating neuropeptides and pituitary hormones.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpendo.00138.2005
PMID: 16603725 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


102. CNS Drug Rev. 2005 Winter;11(4):341-52. doi:
10.1111/j.1527-3458.2005.tb00052.x.

ATC0175: an orally active melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 antagonist 
for the potential treatment of depression and anxiety.

Chaki S(1), Yamaguchi J, Yamada H, Thomsen W, Tran TA, Semple G, Sekiguchi Y.

Author information:
(1)Medicinal Pharmacology Laboratory, Medicinal Research Laboratories, Taisho 
Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., 1-403 Yoshino-cho, Kita-ku, Saitama, Saitama 331-9530, 
Japan. s.chaki@po.rd.taisho.co.jp

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) has been implicated in a variety of 
physiological events. Recent studies clearly suggest that MCH plays an important 
role in the regulation of stress and emotion. To date, two receptor subtypes of 
MCH (MCH1R and MCH2R) have been identified. MCH1R has been suggested to mediate 
most of the physiological functions of MCH. Recently, we synthesized an orally 
active, nonpeptidic antagonist of MCH1R, 
N-(cis-4-{[4-(dimethylamino)quinazolin-2-yl]amino}cyclohexyl)-3,4-difluorobenzamide 
hydrochloride (ATC0175). This compound is a potent antagonist with a high 
affinity for MCH1R and additional affinities for 5-HT1A and 5-HT2B receptors. 
The receptor binding and the functional assay (MCH-induced increase in [Ca2+]i) 
indicated that ATC0175 is a noncompetitive antagonist at MCH1Rs. ATC0175 
exhibited anxiolytic effects in numerous animal models of anxiety including the 
elevated plus-maze test, social interaction test, stress-induced hyperthermia 
and maternal separation-induced vocalization. Like with other stress-related 
peptide receptor antagonists, such as antagonists of corticotropin-releasing 
factor or vasopressin V1b receptor antagonists, anxiolytic effects of ATC0175 
were more pronounced in models containing a stress component. ATC0175 also 
exhibited antidepressant effects in the forced swimming test. ATC0175 increased 
swimming performance without altering climbing behavior, as observed with 
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors. ATC0175 has adequate ADME profile 
(reasonable oral bioavailability and brain penetration) and potent oral activity 
in animal models. In contrast, ATC0175 did not affect spontaneous locomotor 
activity, hexobarbital-induced sleeping time and did not impair rotarod 
performance. Thus, ATC0175 may be devoid of unwanted central nervous system side 
effects, which are sometimes observed with current medications. In addition, 
ATC0175 was well tolerated in rat repeated toxicity study, and had no genotoxic 
liability. Therefore, ATC0175 has the potential to be effective in the treatment 
of patients with depression and/or anxiety disorders.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1527-3458.2005.tb00052.x
PMCID: PMC6741758
PMID: 16614734 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2006 Jul 5;141B(5):524-33. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.b.30335.

Association analyses suggest GPR24 as a shared susceptibility gene for bipolar 
affective disorder and schizophrenia.

Severinsen JE(1), Als TD, Binderup H, Kruse TA, Wang AG, Vang M, Muir WJ, 
Blackwood DH, Mors O, Børglum AD.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Aarhus, Aarhus, Denmark.

Linkage analyses suggest that chromosome 22q12-13 may harbor a shared 
susceptibility locus for bipolar affective disorder (BPD) and schizophrenia 
(SZ). In a study of a sample from the Faeroe Islands we have previously reported 
association between both disorders and microsatellite markers in a 3.6 cM 
segment on 22q13. The present study investigated three candidate genes located 
in this segment: GPR24, ADSL, and ST13. Nine SNPs located in these genes and one 
microsatellite marker (D22S279) were applied in an association analysis of two 
samples: an extension of the previously analyzed Faeroese sample comprising 28 
distantly related cases (17 BPD, 11 SZ subjects) and 44 controls, and a Scottish 
sample including 162 patients with BPD, 103 with SZ, and 200 controls. In both 
samples significant associations were observed in both disorders with 
predominantly GPR24 SNPs and haplotypes. In the Faeroese sample overall P-values 
of 0.0009, 0.0054, and 0.0023 were found for haplotypes in BPD, SZ, and combined 
cases, respectively, and in the Scottish sample overall P-values of 0.0003, 
0.0005, and 0.016 were observed for similar groupings. Specific haplotypes 
showed associations with lowest P-values of 7 x 10(-5) and 0.0006 in the 
combined group of cases from the Faeroe Islands and Scotland, respectively. The 
G protein-coupled receptor 24 encoded by GPR24 binds melanin-concentrating 
hormone (MCH) and has been implicated with feeding behavior, energy metabolism, 
and regulation of stress and mood. To our knowledge this is the first study 
reporting association between GPR24 and BPD and SZ, suggesting that GPR24 
variants may confer susceptibility to both disorders.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.b.30335
PMID: 16741940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2006 Aug 15;16(16):4262-5. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2006.05.069. Epub 2006 Jun 5.

Bicyclo[3.1.0]hexyl urea melanin concentrating hormone (MCH) receptor-1 
antagonists: impacting hERG liability via aryl modifications.

McBriar MD(1), Guzik H, Shapiro S, Xu R, Paruchova J, Clader JW, O'neill K, 
Hawes B, Sorota S, Margulis M, Tucker K, Weston DJ, Cox K.

Author information:
(1)Schering-Plough Research Institute, Kenilworth, NJ 07033, USA. 
mark.mcbriar@spcorp.com

Herein, we report the discovery of an effective strategy to modulate liabilities 
related to affinity of previously disclosed bicyclohexane MCHR-1 antagonists for 
the hERG channel. This paper describes one of several strategies incorporated to 
limit hERG binding via modifications of a terminal aryl group in an otherwise 
promising bicyclohexyl urea series.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2006.05.069
PMID: 16753297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Eur J Pharmacol. 2006 Jul 1;540(1-3):115-20. doi:
10.1016/j.ejphar.2006.04.043.  Epub 2006 May 6.

Lack of efficacy of melanin-concentrating hormone-1 receptor antagonists in 
models of depression and anxiety.

Basso AM(1), Bratcher NA, Gallagher KB, Cowart MD, Zhao C, Sun M, Esbenshade TA, 
Brune ME, Fox GB, Schmidt M, Collins CA, Souers AJ, Iyengar R, Vasudevan A, Kym 
PR, Hancock AA, Rueter LE.

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience, Abbott Laboratories, Global Pharmaceutical Research and 
Development, Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, IL 60064, USA. 
Ana.basso@abbott.com

The aim of this study was to validate melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH)-1 
receptor antagonism as a potential treatment of mood disorders. We attempted to 
replicate the effects previously reported with SNAP-7941 and expanded the 
investigation to three other orally bioavailable MCH-1 receptor antagonists with 
good brain penetration. SNAP-7941 (3-30 mg/kg, i.p.) and T-226296 (5-60 mg/kg, 
p.o.) (+/- racemate), were evaluated in the rat forced swim and mouse tail 
suspension tests. (+)SNAP-7941 (3-10 mg/kg, p.o.) was also tested in a modified 
5-min rat forced swim protocol as previously reported. A-665798 (3-30 mg/kg, 
p.o.) and A-777903 (3-30 mg/kg, p.o.) were tested in mouse tail suspension and 
rat Vogel tests. None of the compounds showed meaningful efficacy in the 
paradigms tested. The lack of efficacy with four structurally different MCH-1 
receptor antagonists does not support a role for therapeutic treatment of 
depression/anxiety via this mechanism of action.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2006.04.043
PMID: 16765941 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Med Chem. 2006 Jun 29;49(13):3753-6. doi: 10.1021/jm051263c.

A thienopyridazinone-based melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 antagonist 
with potent in vivo anorectic properties.

Dyck B(1), Markison S, Zhao L, Tamiya J, Grey J, Rowbottom MW, Zhang M, Vickers 
T, Sorensen K, Norton C, Wen J, Heise CE, Saunders J, Conlon P, Madan A, Schwarz 
D, Goodfellow VS.

Author information:
(1)Neurocrine Biosciences Inc., 12790 El Camino Real, San Diego, California 
92130, USA. bdyck@neurocrine.com

Melanin-concentrating hormone receptor antagonists containing thieno- and a 
benzopyridazinone cores were designed and tested as potential anorectic agents. 
These ligands showed high affinity for the receptor, potent functional activity 
in vitro, and good oral bioavailabilty in rats. The thiophene analogue exhibited 
low iv clearance, long half-life, and high brain penetration. In obese rats, the 
thienopyridazinone demonstrated a dose-dependent reduction in feeding and body 
weight with doses between 1 and 10 mg kg-1.

DOI: 10.1021/jm051263c
PMID: 16789729 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2006 Sep 1;16(17):4450-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bmcl.2006.06.045.  Epub 2006 Jun 30.

Synthesis and structure-activity relationships of retro bis-aminopyrrolidine 
urea (rAPU) derived small-molecule antagonists of the melanin-concentrating 
hormone receptor-1 (MCH-R1). Part 1.

Rowbottom MW(1), Vickers TD, Dyck B, Grey J, Tamiya J, Zhang M, Kiankarimi M, Wu 
D, Dwight W, Wade WS, Schwarz D, Heise CE, Madan A, Fisher A, Petroski R, 
Goodfellow VS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Neurocrine Biosciences Inc., San Diego, CA 
92130, USA. mrowbottom@neurocrine.com

The design, synthesis, and SAR of a series of retro bis-aminopyrrolidine ureas 
are described. Compounds from this series exhibited potent binding affinity and 
functional activity at MCH-R1, and good oral bioavailability in rat.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2006.06.045
PMID: 16814542 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Med Chem. 2006 Jul 13;49(14):4017-22. doi: 10.1021/jm058239j.

Melanin-concentrating hormone-1 receptor antagonists for the treatment of 
obesity.

Handlon AL(1), Zhou H.

Author information:
(1)Metabolic and Viral Center of Excellence for Drug Discovery, GlaxoSmithKline, 
P.O. Box 13398, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709-3398, USA. 
tony.l.handlon@gsk.com

DOI: 10.1021/jm058239j
PMID: 16821761 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2006 Sep 15;16(18):4917-21. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2006.06.055. Epub 2006 Jul 7.

Tetrahydroisoquinolines as MCH-R1 antagonists.

Sasikumar TK(1), Qiang L, Wu WL, Burnett DA, Greenlee WJ, O'Neill K, Hawes BE, 
van Heek M, Graziano M.

Author information:
(1)Schering-Plough Research Institute, 2015 Galloping Hill Road, Kenilworth, NJ 
07033, USA. thavalakulamgar.sasikumar@spcorp.com

A series of potent and selective inhibitors of h-MCH-R1 has been developed based 
on the piperidine glycineamide compounds I and II. These structurally more rigid 
tetrahydroisoquinolines (III and IV) showed better pharmacokinetics. The highly 
potent compounds 12d and 12g displayed excellent rat pk.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2006.06.055
PMID: 16824753 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2006 Sep 15;16(18):4922-30. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2006.06.049. Epub 2006 Jul 7.

Synthesis and structure-activity relationships of retro bis-aminopyrrolidine 
urea (rAPU) derived small-molecule antagonists of the melanin-concentrating 
hormone receptor-1 (MCH-R1). Part 2.

Hudson S(1), Kiankarimi M, Rowbottom MW, Vickers TD, Wu D, Pontillo J, Ching B, 
Dwight W, Goodfellow VS, Schwarz D, Heise CE, Madan A, Wen J, Ban W, Wang H, 
Wade WS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Neurocrine Biosciences Inc., 12790 El 
Camino Real, San Diego, CA 92130, USA. shudson@neurocrine.com

The design, synthesis, and SAR of a series of retro bis-aminopyrrolidine ureas 
are described. Compounds from this series exhibited considerable binding 
affinity (Ki = 1 nM) and functional activity at MCH-R1, acceptable CYP2D6 
inhibition, and good rat brain exposure.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2006.06.049
PMID: 16824755 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Behav Brain Res. 2006 Oct 2;173(1):94-103. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2006.06.007.
Epub  2006 Jul 12.

Mice lacking the melanin-concentrating hormone receptor-1 exhibit an atypical 
psychomotor susceptibility to cocaine and no conditioned cocaine response.

Tyhon A(1), Adamantidis A, Foidart A, Grisar T, Lakaye B, Tirelli E.

Author information:
(1)Unité de Recherche en Psychologie Expérimentale et Neurosciences Cognitives, 
Université de Liège, Boulevard du Rectorat, 5/B-32, Belgium.

The present study aimed at characterizing the acute and intermittent psychomotor 
responsiveness to cocaine in mice lacking the MCHR1 receptor, which is thought 
to modulate the mesocorticolimbic sytem functioning [Smith DG, Tzavara ET, Shaw 
J, Luecke S, Wade M, Davis R, et al. Mesolimbic dopamine super-sensitivity in 
melanin-concentrating hormone-1 receptor deficient mice. J Neurosci 
2005;25:914-22]. On a first free-drug session, MCHR1-deficient mice exhibited 
significantly higher levels of locomotor activity elicited by the novelty of the 
test chambers than their wild-type counterparts. On the following day session, a 
first injection of 6 or 12 mg/kg cocaine induced comparable dose-related 
psychomotor activations in both genotypes, without significant difference in the 
relative increase in locomotion. Over the following eight once-daily test 
sessions, the slight psychomotor increase induced by 6 mg/kg was equivalent in 
both genotypes and constant over the sessions. At 12 mg/kg, cocaine induced a 
clear-cut incremental responsiveness to cocaine in both genotypes on the three 
first sessions; on the following sessions, only the wild-types displayed an 
incremental responsiveness until the last session, a sensitized effect that was 
confirmed for the wild-types but not for the knockouts on a subsequent 
sensitization test (cocaine challenge). Finally, the knockouts did not exhibit 
any sign of cocaine-conditioning (saline challenge), contrarily to the 
wild-types. It is speculated that MCHR1 may contribute to the neurobiological 
mechanisms of conditioned cocaine-induced psychomotor effects, possibly to those 
underpinning sensitization, and to a lesser extent to those sub-serving acute 
pharmacological cocaine action.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2006.06.007
PMID: 16839618 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2006 Sep 15;16(18):4865-71. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2006.06.056. Epub 2006 Jul 12.

SAR of biphenyl carboxamide ligands of the human melanin-concentrating hormone 
receptor 1 (MCH R1): discovery of antagonist SB-568849.

Witty DR(1), Bateson JH, Hervieu GJ, Jeffrey P, Johnson CN, Muir AI, O'Hanlon 
PJ, Stemp G, Stevens AJ, Thewlis KM, Wilson S, Winborn KY.

Author information:
(1)GlaxoSmithKline, New Frontiers Science Park, Third Avenue, Harlow, Essex CM19 
5AW, UK. david.witty@gsk.com

We report here the discovery of a class of MCH R1 ligands based on a biphenyl 
carboxamide template. A docked-in model is presented indicating key interactions 
in the putative binding site of the receptor. Parallel high throughput synthetic 
techniques were utilised to allow rapid exploration of the structure-activity 
relationship around this template, leading to compound SB-568849 which possessed 
good receptor affinity and selectivity. This compound proved to be an antagonist 
with stability in vivo, an acceptable brain-blood ratio and oral 
bioavailability.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2006.06.056
PMID: 16839761 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2006 Sep 15;16(18):4872-8. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2006.06.061. Epub 2006 Jul 12.

Discovery of potent and stable conformationally constrained analogues of the MCH 
R1 antagonist SB-568849.

Witty DR(1), Bateson J, Hervieu GJ, Al-Barazanji K, Jeffrey P, Hamprecht D, 
Haynes A, Johnson CN, Muir AI, O'Hanlon PJ, Stemp G, Stevens AJ, Thewlis K, 
Winborn KY.

Author information:
(1)GlaxoSmithKline, New Frontiers Science Park, Third Avenue, Harlow, Essex CM19 
5AW, UK. david.witty@gsk.com

A strategy of systematically targeting more rigid analogues of the known MCH R1 
receptor antagonist, SB-568849, serendipitously uncovered a binding mode 
accessible to N-aryl-phthalimide ligands. Optimisation to improve the stability 
of this compound class led to the discovery of novel N-aryl-quinazolinones, 
benzotriazinones and thienopyrimidinones as selective ligands with good affinity 
for human melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2006.06.061
PMID: 16839763 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2006 Oct 15;16(20):5445-50. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2006.07.053. Epub 2006 Aug 1.

Identification of substituted 4-aminopiperidines and 3-aminopyrrolidines as 
potent MCH-R1 antagonists for the treatment of obesity.

Kim N(1), Meyers KM, Mendez-Andino JL, Warshakoon NC, Ji W, Wos JA, Colson A, 
Mitchell MC, Davis JR, Pinney BB, Reizes O, Hu XE.

Author information:
(1)Procter and Gamble Pharmaceuticals, 8700 Mason-Montgomery Road, Mason, OH 
45040, USA.

A substituted 4-aminopiperidine was identified as showing activity in an MCH 
assay from an HTS effort. Subsequent structural modification of the scaffold led 
to the identification of a number of active MCH antagonists. 
3,5-Dimethoxy-N-(1-(naphthalen-2-ylmethyl)piperidin-4-yl)benzamide (5c) was 
among those with the highest binding affinity to the MCH receptor (K(i)=27nM), 
when variations were made at benzoyl and naphthylmethyl substitution sites from 
the initial HTS hit. Further optimization via piperidine ring contraction 
resulted in enhanced MCH activity in a 3-aminopyrrolidine series, where 
(R)-3,5-dimethoxy-N-(1-(naphthalen-2-ylmethyl)-pyrrolidin-3-yl)benzamide (10i) 
was found to be an excellent MCH antagonist (K(i)=7nM).

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2006.07.053
PMID: 16879961 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2006 Oct 1;16(19):5066-72. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2006.07.040. Epub 2006 Aug 1.

Solid-phase synthesis and structure-activity relationships of novel biarylethers 
as melanin-concentrating hormone receptor-1 antagonists.

Ma V(1), Bannon AW, Baumgartner J, Hale C, Hsieh F, Hulme C, Rorrer K, Salon J, 
van Staden C, Tempest P.

Author information:
(1)Chemistry Research and Discovery, Amgen Inc., One Amgen Center Drive, 
Thousand Oaks, CA 91320, USA. vma@amgen.com

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a cyclic 19 amino acid orexigenic 
neuropeptide. The action of MCH on feeding is thought to involve the activation 
of its respective G protein-coupled receptor MCH-R1. Consequently, antagonists 
that block MCH regulated MCH-R1 activity may provide a viable approach to the 
treatment of diet-induced obesity. This communication reports the discovery of a 
novel MCH-R1 receptor antagonist, the biarylether 7, identified through high 
throughput screening. The solid-phase synthesis and structure-activity 
relationship of related analogs is described.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2006.07.040
PMID: 16887348 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2006 Oct 15;16(20):5427-31. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2006.07.058. Epub 2006 Aug 2.

Novel aminobenzimidazoles as selective MCH-R1 antagonists for the treatment of 
metabolic diseases.

Sasikumar TK(1), Qiang L, Burnett DA, Greenlee WJ, Hawes BE, Kowalski TJ, 
O'Neill K, Spar BD, Weig B.

Author information:
(1)Schering-Plough Research Institute, 2015 Galloping Hill Road, Kenilworth, NJ 
07033, USA. thavalakulamgar.sasikumar@spcorp.com

A series of novel aminobenzimidazoles was prepared and evaluated for h-MCH-R1 
antagonist properties. Most of the compounds showed excellent h-MCH-R1 binding 
affinity as well as mouse ex vivo binding. Compounds 9 and 18 were active in 
mouse DIO studies at 30mpk.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2006.07.058
PMID: 16889961 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2006 Oct 1;16(19):4994-5000. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2006.07.054. Epub 2006 Aug 9.

Novel benzimidazole-based MCH R1 antagonists.

Carpenter AJ(1), Al-Barazanji KA, Barvian KK, Bishop MJ, Britt CS, Cooper JP, 
Goetz AS, Grizzle MK, Hertzog DL, Ignar DM, Morgan RO, Peckham GE, Speake JD, 
Swain WR.

Author information:
(1)Metabolic and Viral Diseases Centre of Excellence for Drug Discovery, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Five Moore Drive, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA. 
andrew.j.carpenter@gsk.com

The identification of an MCH R1 antagonist screening hit led to the optimization 
of a class of benzimidazole-based MCH R1 antagonists. Structure-activity 
relationships and efforts to optimize pharmacokinetic properties are detailed 
along with the demonstration of the effectiveness of an MCH R1 antagonist in an 
animal model of obesity.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2006.07.054
PMID: 16904318 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2006 Oct 15;16(20):5275-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2006.08.008. Epub 2006 Aug 17.

4-Aminoquinoline melanin-concentrating hormone 1-receptor (MCH1R) antagonists.

Jiang J(1), Lin P, Hoang M, Chang L, Tan C, Feighner S, Palyha OC, Hreniuk DL, 
Pan J, Sailer AW, Morin NR, MacNeil DJ, Howard AD, Van der Ploeg LH, Goulet MT, 
DeVita RJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Merck Research Laboratories, PO Box 2000, 
Rahway, NJ 07065-0900, USA.

Structure-activity relationships of a 4-aminoquinoline MCH1R antagonist lead 
series were explored by synthesis of analogs with modifications at the 2-, 4-, 
and 6-positions of the original HTS hit. Improvements to the original screening 
lead included lipophilic groups at the 2-position and biphenyl, cyclohexyl 
phenyl, and hydrocinnamyl carboxamides at the 6-position. Modifications of the 
4-amino group were not well tolerated.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2006.08.008
PMID: 16919453 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2006 Oct 15;16(20):5270-4. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2006.08.006. Epub 2006 Aug 17.

2-Aminoquinoline melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH)1R antagonists.

Jiang J(1), Hoang M, Young JR, Chaung D, Eid R, Turner C, Lin P, Tong X, Wang J, 
Tan C, Feighner S, Palyha O, Hreniuk DL, Pan J, Sailer AW, MacNeil DJ, Howard A, 
Shearman L, Stribling S, Camacho R, Strack A, Van der Ploeg LH, Goulet MT, 
DeVita RJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, PO Box 2000, Rahway, NJ 07065-0900, USA.

A series of 2-aminoquinoline compounds was prepared and evaluated in MCH1R 
binding and functional antagonist assays. Small dialkyl, methylalkyl, 
methylcycloalkyl, and cyclic amines were tolerated at the quinoline 2-position. 
The in vivo efficacy of compound 12 was explored and compared to that of a 
related inactive analog to determine their effects on food intake and body 
weight in rodents.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2006.08.006
PMID: 16919456 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Biol Psychiatry. 2007 Jan 15;61(2):174-80. doi:
10.1016/j.biopsych.2006.03.076.  Epub 2006 Aug 24.

A study of the involvement of melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1) 
in murine models of depression.

Roy M(1), David N, Cueva M, Giorgetti M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Bioengineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. 
roym@stanfordalumni.org

BACKGROUND: Most antidepressant medications target central monoamine systems and 
are often characterized by limited efficacies and unwanted side effects. Thus, 
significant efforts are ongoing to identify novel targets for the treatment of 
depression. Growing evidence suggests that neuropeptides play a role in the 
pathophysiology of depression. The melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is one 
such neuropeptide, implicated in the modulation of many physiological responses.
METHODS: We utilized an array of techniques including chronic mild stress (CMS) 
as a depression paradigm, neurobehavior, gene expression analysis, and knockout 
genetics to investigate the role of MCH receptor subtype 1 (MCHR1) in murine 
models of depression.
RESULTS: We report here that following a 5-week exposure to repeated chronic 
mild stress (an ethologically relevant animal model of depression), C57Bl/6J 
mice have increased hippocampal gene expression of MCH receptor subtype 1 
(MCHR1), the cognate melanin concentrating hormone receptor in mice. This 
increased gene expression is reversed by chronic fluoxetine hydrochloride 
(Prozac) treatment. Additionally, while female and male mice carrying a null 
mutation of the MCHR1 gene show comparable anxiolytic-like behavior on the open 
field, only female knockout mice exhibit antidepressant-like behavior, when 
tested on the forced swim and tail suspension tests.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, we suggest that antagonism of the MCHR1 receptor may 
provide a novel approach for the treatment of affective disorders, including 
depression, with a potentially increased efficacy in women.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2006.03.076
PMID: 16934771 [Indexed for MEDLINE]121. Drug News Perspect. 2006 Jun;19(5):273-86. doi:
10.1358/dnp.2006.19.5.985938.

Biological examination of melanin concentrating hormone receptor 1: 
multi-tasking from the hypothalamus.

Rokosz LL(1), Hobbs DW.

Author information:
(1)Pharmacopeia, Princeton, New Jersey, USA. rock@pcop.com

Republished in
    Timely Top Med Cardiovasc Dis. 2006;10:E23.

Since its discovery as the first receptor for the orexigenic neuropeptide 
melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH), the MCH receptor, MCHR1, has been actively 
pursued for therapeutic intervention in the treatment of obesity. Mice with 
targeted deletion of MCHR1 or its cognate ligand, MCH, generally have decreased 
body weight and fat mass and are resistant to diet-induced obesity compared with 
their wild-type counterparts. Mice treated via intracerebroventricular infusion 
with MCH, or that overexpress MCH or MCHR1, exhibit weight gain compared with 
control animals. MCHR1 is also a central target of leptin signaling and appears 
to be a mediator of insulin resistance. The distribution of MCH and MCHR1 in rat 
brain, outside of regions that control appetite and satiety, has led to the 
finding that MCH signaling participates in other functions such as emotion and 
stress. This review will describe in detail the biological studies that show how 
MCH and MCHR1 control numerous physiological functions. The current status of 
the development of MCHR1 antagonists for clinical use will also be assessed. 
Given the substantial link between obesity and its many associated afflictions, 
a single pharmaceutical agent that could be used to treat multiple pathologies 
would be welcome.

(c) 2006 Prous Science. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1358/dnp.2006.19.5.985938
PMID: 16941049 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


122. J Biol Chem. 2006 Oct 27;281(43):32496-507. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M602889200.
Epub  2006 Aug 31.

Interaction of neurochondrin with the melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 
interferes with G protein-coupled signal transduction but not agonist-mediated 
internalization.

Francke F(1), Ward RJ, Jenkins L, Kellett E, Richter D, Milligan G, Bächner D.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Cell Biochemistry and Clinical Neurobiology, University 
Hospital Hamburg-Eppendorf, Martinistrasse 52, 20246 Hamburg, Germany.

Screening of a human brain cDNA library using the C-terminal tail of the 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1) as bait in a yeast two-hybrid 
assay resulted in the identification of the neurite-outgrowth related factor, 
neurochondrin. This interaction was verified in overlay, pulldown, and 
co-immunoprecipitation assays. Deletion mapping confined the binding to the C 
terminus of neurochondrin and to the proximal C terminus of MCHR1, a region 
known to be involved in G protein binding and signal transduction. This region 
of the MCHR1 is also able to interact with the actin- and intermediate 
filament-binding protein, periplakin. Interactions of MCHR1 with neurochondrin 
and periplakin were competitive, indicating that these two proteins bind to 
overlapping regions of MCHR1. Although neurochondrin did not interfere with 
melanin-concentrating hormone-mediated internalization of the receptor, it did 
inhibit G protein-coupled signal transduction via both Galpha(i/o) and 
Galpha(q/11) family G proteins as measured by each of melanin-concentrating 
hormone-induced G protein-activated inwardly rectifying K(+) channel activity of 
voltage-clamped amphibian oocytes, by calcium mobilization in transfected 
mammalian cells, and by reduction in the capacity of melanin-concentrating 
hormone to promote binding of [(35)S]guanosine 5'-3-O-(thio)triphosphate to both 
Galpha(o1) and Galpha(11). Immunohistochemistry revealed co-expression of 
neurochondrin and MCHR1 within the rodent brain, suggesting that neurochondrin 
may be involved in the regulation of MCHR1 signaling and play a role in 
modulating melanin-concentrating hormone-mediated functions in vivo.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M602889200
PMID: 16945926 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2006 Oct 19;259(1-2):1-9. doi:
10.1016/j.mce.2006.07.003.  Epub 2006 Sep 20.

Manipulation of small-molecule inhibitory kinetics modulates MCH-R1 function.

Schwarz DA(1), Allen MM, Petroski RE, Pomeroy JE, Heise CE, Mistry MS, Selkirk 
JV, Nottebaum LM, Grey J, Zhang M, Goodfellow VS, Maki RA.

Author information:
(1)Neurocrine Biosciences, Inc., Department of Molecular Biology, 12790 El 
Camino Real, San Diego, CA 92130, USA. dschwarz@neurocrine.com

The capacity of novel benzopyridazinone-based antagonists to inhibit MCH-R1 
function, relative to their affinity for the receptor, has been investigated. 
Three compounds that differ by the addition of either a chlorine atom, or 
trifluoromethyl group, have nearly identical receptor affinities; however their 
abilities to inhibit receptor elicited signaling events, measured as a function 
of time, are dramatically altered. Both the chlorinated and trifluoromethyl 
modified compounds have a very slow on-rate to maximal functional inhibition 
relative to the unmodified base compound. A similar impact on inhibitory 
capacity can be achieved by modifying the side-chain composition at position 
2.53 of the receptor; replacement of the native phenylalanine with alanine 
significantly reduces the amount of time required by the chlorinated compound to 
attain maximal functional inhibition. The primary attribute responsible for this 
alteration in inhibitory capacity appears to be the overall bulk of the amino 
acid at this position-substitution of the similarly sized amino acids leucine 
and tyrosine results in phenotypes that are indistinguishable from the wild type 
receptor. Finally, the impact of these differential inhibitory kinetics has been 
examined in cultured rat neurons by measuring the ability of the compounds to 
reverse MCH mediated inhibition of calcium currents. As observed using the cell 
expression models, the chlorinated compound has a diminished capacity to 
interfere with receptor function. Collectively, these data suggest that 
differential inhibitory on rates between a small-molecule antagonist and its 
target receptor can impact the ability of the compound to modify the biological 
response(s) elicited by the receptor.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mce.2006.07.003
PMID: 16987592 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


124. CNS Drugs. 2006;20(10):801-11. doi: 10.2165/00023210-200620100-00002.

Melanin-concentrating hormone MCH1 receptor antagonists: a potential new 
approach to the treatment of depression and anxiety disorders.

Shimazaki T(1), Yoshimizu T, Chaki S.

Author information:
(1)Medicinal Pharmacology Laboratory, Medicinal Research Laboratories, Taisho 
Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd, Saitama, Japan.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a cyclic 19-amino-acid neuropeptide that 
has been considered to play a key role in the regulation of feeding and energy 
homeostasis. To date, two receptor subtypes for MCH (designated MCH(1) and 
MCH(2)) have been identified; the MCH(1) receptor has been proposed to mediate 
the physiological functions of MCH in rodents. In addition to the crucial roles 
of MCH in feeding behaviour, anatomical and neurochemical studies suggest that 
the MCH/MCH(1) system is involved in the regulation of emotion and stress 
responses. This assumption has been supported by a recent series of 
neurochemical and behavioural studies. Indeed, several lines of evidence show 
that MCH activates stress responses and induces depressive- and anxiety-like 
behaviours, while the blockade of MCH(1) receptors results in antidepressant and 
anxiolytic effects in various rodent models. Moreover, MCH may decrease reward 
activity while increasing hypothalamus-pituitary adrenal axis activity, both of 
which may underlie the neurochemical mechanisms of the depression and 
anxiety-like effects induced by MCH. The effects of MCH(1) receptor antagonists 
in animal models, together with their rapid onset of effect and lack of adverse 
CNS effects, suggest that they deserve further investigation as potential new 
treatments for depression and anxiety disorders.

DOI: 10.2165/00023210-200620100-00002
PMID: 16999451 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Med Chem. 2006 Nov 2;49(22):6569-84. doi: 10.1021/jm060683e.

Optimization of chromone-2-carboxamide melanin concentrating hormone receptor 1 
antagonists: assessment of potency, efficacy, and cardiovascular safety.

Lynch JK(1), Freeman JC, Judd AS, Iyengar R, Mulhern M, Zhao G, Napier JJ, Wodka 
D, Brodjian S, Dayton BD, Falls D, Ogiela C, Reilly RM, Campbell TJ, Polakowski 
JS, Hernandez L, Marsh KC, Shapiro R, Knourek-Segel V, Droz B, Bush E, Brune M, 
Preusser LC, Fryer RM, Reinhart GA, Houseman K, Diaz G, Mikhail A, Limberis JT, 
Sham HL, Collins CA, Kym PR.

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Disease Research, Integrative Pharmacology, Process Chemistry, and 
Exploratory Pharmacokinetics, Abbott Laboratories, 100 Abbott Park Road, Abbott 
Park, IL 60064, USA. john.k.lynch@abbott.com

Evaluation of multiple structurally distinct series of melanin concentrating 
hormone receptor 1 antagonists in an anesthetized rat cardiovascualar assay led 
to the identification of a chromone-2-carboxamide series as having excellent 
safety against the chosen cardiovascular endpoints at high drug concentrations 
in the plasma and brain. Optimization of this series led to considerable 
improvements in affinity, functional potency, and pharmacokinetic profile. This 
led to the identification of a 7-fluorochromone-2-carboxamide (22) that was 
orally efficacious in a diet-induced obese mouse model, retained a favorable 
cardiovascular profile in rat, and demonstrated dramatic improvement in effects 
on mean arterial pressure in our dog cardiovascular model compared to other 
series reported by our group. However, this analogue also led to prolongation of 
the QT interval in the dog that was linked to affinity for hERG channel and 
unexpectedly potent functional blockade of this ion channel.

DOI: 10.1021/jm060683e
PMID: 17064075 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Timely Top Med Cardiovasc Dis. 2006 Sep 1;10:E23.

Biological examination of melanin concentrating hormone receptor 1: 
multi-tasking from the hypothalamus.

Rokosz LL(1), Hobbs DW.

Author information:
(1)Pharmacopeia, Princeton, New Jersey, USA.

Republished from
    Drug News Perspect. 2006 Jun;19(5):273-86.

Since its discovery as the first receptor for the orexigenic neuropeptide 
melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH), the MCH receptor, MCHR1, has been actively 
pursued for therapeutic intervention in the treatment of obesity. Mice with 
targeted deletion of MCHR1 or its cognate ligand, MCH, generally have decreased 
body weight and fat mass and are resistant to diet-induced obesity compared with 
their wild-type counterparts. Mice treated via intracerebroventricular infusion 
with MCH, or that overexpress MCH or MCHR1, exhibit weight gain compared with 
control animals. MCHR1 is also a central target of leptin signaling and appears 
to be a mediator of insulin resistance. The distribution of MCH and MCHR1 in rat 
brain, outside of regions that control appetite and satiety, has led to the 
finding that MCH signaling participates in other functions such as emotion and 
stress. This review will describe in detail the biological studies that show how 
MCH and MCHR1 control numerous physiological functions. The current status of 
the development of MCHR1 antagonists for clinical use will also be assessed. 
Given the substantial link between obesity and its many associated afflictions, 
a single pharmaceutical agent that could be used to treat multiple pathologies 
would be welcome.

(c) 2006 Prous Science. All rights reserved.

PMID: 17066150


127. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2007 Feb 1;17(3):814-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bmcl.2006.10.053.  Epub 2006 Oct 25.

Aminomethyl tetrahydronaphthalene biphenyl carboxamide MCH-R1 
antagonists--Increasing selectivity over hERG.

Meyers KM(1), Kim N, Méndez-Andino JL, Hu XE, Mumin RN, Klopfenstein SR, Wos JA, 
Mitchell MC, Paris JL, Ackley DC, Holbert JK, Mittelstadt SW, Reizes O.

Author information:
(1)Procter & Gamble Pharmaceuticals, 8700 Mason-Montgomery Road, Mason, OH 
45039, USA.

Aminomethyl tetrahydronaphthalene biphenyl carboxamide MCH-R1 antagonists with 
greater selectivity over hERG were identified. SAR studies addressing two 
distinct alternatives for structural modifications leading to improve hERG 
selectivity are described.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2006.10.053
PMID: 17107791 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2007 Feb 1;17(3):832-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bmcl.2006.10.056.  Epub 2006 Oct 25.

MCH-R1 antagonists based on an arginine scaffold: SAR studies on the 
amino-terminus.

Méndez-Andino J(1), Colson AO, Denton D, Mitchell MC, Cross-Doersen D, Hu XE.

Author information:
(1)Procter & Gamble Pharmaceuticals, 8700 Mason-Montgomery Road, Mason, OH 
45039, USA. mendezandino.jl@pg.com

We have identified a novel series of potent MCH-R1 antagonists based on 
l-arginine. As predicted by computational methods, there was an activity 
dependence on the pi-electronic character of the aromatic systems corresponding 
to the amino-terminus of these molecules. These results have enhanced our 
understanding of the MCH-R1 receptor and the potential for a predictive homology 
model.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2006.10.056
PMID: 17107794 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2007 Feb 1;17(3):819-22. doi:
10.1016/j.bmcl.2006.10.052.  Epub 2006 Oct 25.

Aminomethyl tetrahydronaphthalene ketopiperazine MCH-R1 antagonists--Increasing 
selectivity over hERG.

Meyers KM(1), Méndez-Andino JL, Colson AO, Warshakoon NC, Wos JA, Mitchell MC, 
Hodge KM, Howard JM, Ackley DC, Holbert JK, Mittelstadt SW, Dowty ME, Obringer 
CM, Reizes O, Hu XE.

Author information:
(1)Procter & Gamble Pharmaceuticals, 8700 Mason-Montgomery Road, Mason, OH 
45039, USA.

A direct correlation between hERG binding and QTc prolongation was established 
for a series of aminomethyl tetrahydronaphthalene ketopiperazine MCH-R1 
antagonists. Compounds within this class with greater selectivity over hERG were 
developed. Compound 4h proved to have the best profile, with MCH-R1 Ki = 16 nm 
and hERG IC50 = 25 microM.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2006.10.052
PMID: 17107796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


130. J Med Chem. 2006 Nov 30;49(24):7095-107. doi: 10.1021/jm060572f.

Potent, selective, and orally efficacious antagonists of melanin-concentrating 
hormone receptor 1.

Tavares FX(1), Al-Barazanji KA, Bigham EC, Bishop MJ, Britt CS, Carlton DL, 
Feldman PL, Goetz AS, Grizzle MK, Guo YC, Handlon AL, Hertzog DL, Ignar DM, Lang 
DG, Ott RJ, Peat AJ, Zhou HQ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, 
North Carolina 27709, USA. fxt66911@gsk.com

The high expression of MCH in the hypothalamus with the lean hypophagic 
phenotype coupled with increased resting metabolic rate and resistance to high 
fat diet-induced obesity of MCH KO mice has spurred considerable efforts to 
develop small molecule MCHR1 antagonists. Starting from a lead 
thienopyrimidinone series, structure-activity studies at the 3- and 6-positions 
of the thienopyrimidinone core afforded potent and selective MCHR1 antagonists 
with representative examples having suitable pharmacokinetic properties. Based 
on structure-activity relationships, a structural model for MCHR1 was 
constructed to explain the binding mode of these antagonists. In general, a good 
correlation was observed between pKas and activity in the right-hand side of the 
template, with Asp123 playing an important role in the enhancement of binding 
affinity. A representative example when evaluated chronically in diet-induced 
obese mice resulted in good weight loss effects. These antagonists provide a 
viable lead series in the discovery of new therapies for the treatment of 
obesity.

DOI: 10.1021/jm060572f
PMID: 17125262 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Med Chem. 2006 Nov 30;49(24):7108-18. doi: 10.1021/jm060814b.

6-(4-chlorophenyl)-3-substituted-thieno[3,2-d]pyrimidin-4(3H)-one-based 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 antagonist.

Tavares FX(1), Al-Barazanji KA, Bishop MJ, Britt CS, Carlton DL, Cooper JP, 
Feldman PL, Garrido DM, Goetz AS, Grizzle MK, Hertzog DL, Ignar DM, Lang DG, 
McIntyre MS, Ott RJ, Peat AJ, Zhou HQ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, 
North Carolina 27709, USA. fxt66911@gsk.com

Genetic manipulation studies in mice at both the MCH receptor 1 (MCHR1) as well 
as the MCH peptide levels have implicated MCHR1 as a key player in energy 
homeostasis. The phenotype exhibited by these studies, that is, increased 
metabolic rate, resistance to high fat diet, and subsequent weight loss, has 
spurred considerable efforts to develop antagonists of MCHR1. In continuation of 
efforts directed toward this goal, the present work capitalizes on the putative 
binding mode of an MCH antagonist, resulting in the identification of several 
novel chemotypes that are potent and selective MCHR1 antagonists. In addition, 
the favorable pharmacokinetics of representative examples has allowed for the 
evaluation of an MCHR1 antagonist in a high fat diet-induced obese rodent model 
of obesity. The tolerability of the right-hand side of the template for diverse 
chemotypes accompanied by favorable effects on weight loss enhances the 
attractiveness of this template in the pursuit toward development of effective 
anti-obesity agents.

DOI: 10.1021/jm060814b
PMID: 17125263 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2007 Feb 1;17(3):657-61. doi:
10.1016/j.bmcl.2006.10.096.  Epub 2006 Nov 6.

Novel pyrazolopiperazinone- and pyrrolopiperazinone-based MCH-R1 antagonists.

Meyers KM(1), Méndez-Andino J, Colson AO, Hu XE, Wos JA, Mitchell MC, Hodge K, 
Howard J, Paris JL, Dowty ME, Obringer CM, Reizes O.

Author information:
(1)Procter and Gamble Pharmaceuticals, 8700 Mason-Montgomery Road, Mason, OH 
45039, USA.

The synthesis and biological testing of novel classes of potent 
melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH-R1) antagonists based on pyrazolopiperazinone 
and pyrrolopiperazinone scaffolds are described.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2006.10.096
PMID: 17174091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2007 Mar 1;17(5):1403-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bmcl.2006.11.092.  Epub 2006 Dec 2.

Quinazoline and benzimidazole MCH-1R antagonists.

Arienzo R(1), Cramp S, Dyke HJ, Lockey PM, Norman D, Roach AG, Smith P, Wong M, 
Wren SP.

Author information:
(1)Argenta Discovery Limited, 8/9 Spire Green Centre, Flex Meadow, Harlow, Essex 
CM19 5TR, UK.

We have modified the previously reported 2-aminoquinoline 1 to provide two novel 
series of MCH-1R antagonists. Representative compounds from the quinazoline and 
benzimidazole series have been shown to be potent and selective, with promising 
in vitro eADME profiles.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2006.11.092
PMID: 17178222 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2006 Dec;85(4):728-35. doi:
10.1016/j.pbb.2006.11.004.  Epub 2006 Dec 22.

The regulation of alcohol intake by melanin-concentrating hormone in rats.

Duncan EA(1), Rider TR, Jandacek RJ, Clegg DJ, Benoit SC, Tso P, Woods SC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Cincinnati, USA. 
duncanel@mail.nih.gov

Given into the brain, melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) increases alcohol 
consumption, but the mechanism and physiological relevance of this effect are 
unclear. We hypothesized that endogenous MCH will enhance alcohol drinking and 
that MCH increases alcohol's reinforcing properties. An MCH receptor 1 (MCHR1) 
antagonist, or saline was administered centrally alone, or preceding MCH or 
saline to rats trained to drink 10% alcohol using sucrose fading. Blocking MCHR1 
neither reduced alcohol intake (saline=0.4+/-0.1 g, 30 microg MCHR1 
antagonist=0.4+/-0.1 g/kg alcohol), nor attenuated MCH-induced alcohol drinking 
(MCHR1 antagonist/saline=0.7+/-0.1 g/kg, MCHR1 antagonist/MCH=0.9+/-0.1 g/kg 
alcohol). Another cohort of rats was trained to lever press for alcohol on a 
progressive ratio schedule. MCH or saline was administered centrally and lever 
presses were measured. MCH had no effect prior to the break point, but increased 
total responding during the session (saline=87.2+/-32.0, MCH=315.4+/-61.0 
presses). In conclusion, these data suggest that MCH augments alcohol drinking 
partly by enhancing the drug's reinforcing value. Further, endogenous MCH does 
not seem to regulate alcohol drinking, however because the antagonist failed to 
attenuate MCH-induced alcohol intake this conclusion is tentative.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pbb.2006.11.004
PMCID: PMC3856657
PMID: 17188345 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2007 Feb 15;17(4):884-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bmcl.2006.11.061.  Epub 2006 Dec 1.

Constrained 7-fluorocarboxychromone-4-aminopiperidine based 
Melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 antagonists: the effects of chirality 
on substituted indan-1-ylamines.

Souers AJ(1), Iyengar RR, Judd AS, Beno DW, Gao J, Zhao G, Brune ME, Napier JJ, 
Mulhern MM, Lynch JK, Freeman JC, Wodka D, Chen CJ, Falls HD, Brodjian S, Dayton 
BD, Diaz GJ, Bush EN, Shapiro R, Droz BA, Knourek-Segel V, Hernandez LE, Marsh 
KC, Reilly RM, Sham HL, Collins CA, Kym PR.

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Disease Research, Abbott Laboratories, 100 Abbott Park Road, Abbott 
Park, IL 60064, USA. andrew.souers@abbott.com

The incorporation of constrained tertiary amines into an existing class of 
N-benzyl-4-aminopiperidinyl chromone-based MCHr1 antagonists led to the 
identification of a series of chiral racemic compounds that displayed good to 
excellent functional potency, binding affinity, and selectivity over the hERG 
channel. Further separation of two distinct chiral racemic compounds into their 
corresponding pairs of enantiomers revealed a considerable selectivity for MCHr1 
for one configuration, in addition to a striking difference in oral exposure 
between one pair of enantiomers in diet-induced obese mice. Oral administration 
of the most potent compound in this class in the same animal model led to 
significant reduction of fat mass in a semi-chronic model for weight loss.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2006.11.061
PMID: 17188866 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2007 Feb 15;17(4):874-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bmcl.2006.11.065.  Epub 2006 Dec 1.

An evaluation of 3,4-methylenedioxy phenyl replacements in the aminopiperidine 
chromone class of MCHr1 antagonists.

Iyengar RR(1), Lynch JK, Mulhern MM, Judd AS, Freeman JC, Gao J, Souers AJ, Zhao 
G, Wodka D, Doug Falls H, Brodjian S, Dayton BD, Reilly RM, Swanson S, Su Z, 
Martin RL, Leitza ST, Houseman KA, Diaz G, Collins CA, Sham HL, Kym PR.

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Disease Research, Metabolic Disease Research, Abbott Laboratories, 
100 Abbott Park Road, Abbott Park, IL 60064, USA. rajesh.iyengar@abbott.com

The optimization of potent MCHr1 antagonist 1 with respect to improving its in 
vitro profile by replacement of the 3,4-methylenedioxy phenyl (piperonyl) moiety 
led to the discovery of 19, a compound that showed excellent MCHr1 binding and 
functional potencies in addition to possessing superior hERG separation, CYP3A4 
profile, and receptor cross-reactivity profiles.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2006.11.065
PMID: 17234405 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Bioorg Med Chem. 2007 Mar 1;15(5):2092-105. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2006.12.028.
Epub  2006 Dec 20.

The efficacy and cardiac evaluation of aminomethyl tetrahydronaphthalene 
ketopiperazines: a novel class of potent MCH-R1 antagonists.

Méndez-Andino JL(1), Colson AO, Meyers KM, Mitchell MC, Hodge K, Howard JM, Kim 
N, Ackley DC, Holbert JK, Mittelstadt SW, Dowty ME, Obringer CM, Suchanek P, 
Reizes O, Hu XE, Wos JA.

Author information:
(1)Procter & Gamble Pharmaceuticals, 8700 Mason-Montgomery Road, Mason, OH 
45039, USA. mendezandino.jl@pg.com

The design, synthesis, and biological studies of a novel class of MCH-R1 
antagonists based on an aminotetrahydronaphthalene ketopiperazine scaffold is 
described. Compounds within this class promoted significant body weight 
reduction in mouse diet induced obesity studies. The potential for hERG blockage 
activity and QT interval studies in anesthetized dogs are discussed.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmc.2006.12.028
PMID: 17236777 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


138. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2007 Apr;321(1):237-48. doi: 10.1124/jpet.106.109678.
Epub  2007 Jan 19.

Efficacy of the MCHR1 antagonist 
N-[3-(1-{[4-(3,4-difluorophenoxy)phenyl]methyl}(4-piperidyl))-4-methylphenyl]-2-methylpropanamide 
(SNAP 94847) in mouse models of anxiety and depression following acute and 
chronic administration is independent of hippocampal neurogenesis.

David DJ(1), Klemenhagen KC, Holick KA, Saxe MD, Mendez I, Santarelli L, Craig 
DA, Zhong H, Swanson CJ, Hegde LG, Ping XI, Dong D, Marzabadi MR, Gerald CP, Hen 
R.

Author information:
(1)Center for Neurobiology and Behavior, Columbia University, New York, New 
York, USA.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a hypothalamic neuropeptide that plays a 
role in the modulation of food intake and mood. In rodents, the actions of MCH 
are mediated via the MCHR1 receptor. The goal of this study was to investigate 
the effects of acute (1 h) and chronic (28 days) p.o. dosing of a novel MCHR1 
antagonist, 
N-[3-(1-{[4-(3,4-difluorophenoxy)-phenyl]methyl}(4-piperidyl))-4-methylphenyl]-2-methylpropanamide 
(SNAP 94847), in three mouse models predictive of antidepressant/anxiolytic-like 
activity: novelty suppressed feeding (NSF) in 129S6/SvEvTac mice and light/dark 
paradigm (L/D) and forced swim test (FST) in BALB/cJ mice. A significant 
increase in the time spent in the light compartment of the L/D box was observed 
in response to acute and chronic treatment with SNAP 94847. An 
anxiolytic/antidepressant-like effect was found in the NSF test after acute and 
chronic treatment, whereas no effect was observed in the FST. Because 
neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus has been shown to be a requirement for the 
effects of antidepressants in the NSF test, we investigated whether neurogenesis 
was required for the effect of SNAP 94847. We showed that chronic treatment with 
SNAP 94847 stimulated proliferation of progenitors in the dentate gyrus. The 
efficacy of SNAP 94847 in the NSF test, however, was unaltered in mice in which 
neurogenesis was suppressed by X-irradiation. These results indicate that SNAP 
94847 has a unique anxiolytic-like profile after both acute and chronic 
administration and that its mechanism of action is distinct from that of 
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and tricyclic antidepressants.

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.106.109678
PMID: 17237257 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2007 Mar 15;17(6):1718-21. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2006.12.080. Epub 2006 Dec 24.

Discovery of tetralin ureas as potent melanin concentrating hormone 1 receptor 
antagonists.

Guo T(1), Gu H, Hobbs DW, Busler DE, Rokosz LL.

Author information:
(1)Pharmacopeia Drug Discovery Inc., PO Box 5350, Princeton, NJ 08543-5350, USA. 
tguo@pcop.com

Melanin concentrating hormone (MCH) plays an important role in the regulation of 
food intake and energy balance in mammals. MCH-1 receptor (MCH1R) deficient mice 
are lean and resistant to diet-induced obesity. As such, MCH1R antagonists are 
believed to have potential as possible treatments for obesity. The discovery of 
a novel class of tetralin ureas as potent MCH1R antagonists is described herein.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2006.12.080
PMID: 17251014 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Diabetes. 2007 Feb;56(2):311-9. doi: 10.2337/db06-0708.

Melanin concentrating hormone is a novel regulator of islet function and growth.

Pissios P(1), Ozcan U, Kokkotou E, Okada T, Liew CW, Liu S, Peters JN, Dahlgren 
G, Karamchandani J, Kudva YC, Kurpad AJ, Kennedy RT, Maratos-Flier E, Kulkarni 
RN.

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA 
02215, USA.

Melanin concentrating hormone (MCH) is a hypothalamic neuropeptide known to play 
a critical role in energy balance. We have previously reported that 
overexpression of MCH is associated with mild obesity. In addition, mice have 
substantial hyperinsulinemia and islet hyperplasia that is out of proportion 
with their degree of obesity. In this study, we further explored the role of MCH 
in the endocrine pancreas. Both MCH and MCHR1 are expressed in mouse and human 
islets and in clonal beta-cell lines as assessed using quantitative real-time 
PCR and immunohistochemistry. Mice lacking MCH (MCH-KO) on either a C57Bl/6 or 
129Sv genetic background showed a significant reduction in beta-cell mass and 
complemented our earlier observation of increased beta-cell mass in 
MCH-overexpressing mice. Furthermore, the compensatory islet hyperplasia 
secondary to a high-fat diet, which was evident in wild-type controls, was 
attenuated in MCH-KO. Interestingly, MCH enhanced insulin secretion in human and 
mouse islets and rodent beta-cell lines in a dose-dependent manner. Real-time 
PCR analyses of islet RNA derived from MCH-KO revealed altered expression of 
islet-enriched genes such as glucagon, forkhead homeobox A2, hepatocyte nuclear 
factor (HNF)4alpha, and HNF1alpha. Together, these data provide novel evidence 
for an autocrine role for MCH in the regulation of beta-cell mass dynamics and 
in islet secretory function and suggest that MCH is part of a hypothalamic-islet 
(pancreatic) axis.

DOI: 10.2337/db06-0708
PMID: 17259374 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Behav Brain Res. 2007 Mar 28;178(2):293-304. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2007.01.006.
 Epub 2007 Jan 10.

Exploratory activity, motor coordination, and spatial learning in Mchr1 knockout 
mice.

Lalonde R(1), Qian S.

Author information:
(1)Université de Rouen, Faculté de Médecine et de Pharmacie, 22 bld Gambetta, 
Bâtiment de Recherche, INSERM U614, IFRMP, 76183 Rouen Cedex, France. 
robert.lalonde@univ-rouen.fr

Male mice with a null mutation of Mchr1, encoding melanin concentrating hormone 
receptor-1, were compared to wild-type on two background strains. Mchr1 knockout 
(KO) mice were more active than 129/SvEv and C57BL/6J wild-type strains in a 
photocell actimeter. In addition, Mchr1 KO mice on the C57BL/6J background were 
less anxious in the elevated plus-maze, while on the 129/SvEv background, the 
mutants were less emotionally reactive as estimated by fecal boli and 
handling-related vocalization. There was no detrimental impact of the null 
mutation on motor coordination and spatial learning. Mchr1 KO mice had shorter 
latencies before reaching the escape platform, but only on the 129/SvEv 
background. Null mutants were lighter than C57BL/6J controls but heavier than 
129/SvEv controls, attributable to interactions with strain-dependent genes.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2007.01.006
PMID: 17270288 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2007 Apr;151(2):210-9. doi:
10.1016/j.ygcen.2007.01.011.  Epub 2007 Jan 25.

The melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 2 (MCH-R2) mediates the effect of MCH 
to control body color for background adaptation in the barfin flounder.

Takahashi A(1), Kosugi T, Kobayashi Y, Yamanome T, Schiöth HB, Kawauchi H.

Author information:
(1)School of Fisheries Sciences, Kitasato University, Ofunato, Iwate 022-0101, 
Japan. akiyoshi@kitasato-u.ac.jp

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a neuropeptide generated in neurons 
originating in the hypothalamus, from which axons project to the entire brain 
and neurohypophysis in fish. MCH has both central and peripheral roles such as 
food intake and body color change. Here we cloned two MCH receptors (MCH-R) from 
the barfin flounder, Verasper moseri, Pleuronectiformes. The phylogenetic 
analysis shows that these are orthologues to the mammalian MCH-R1 and MCH-R2 
showing 49 and 30% amino acid sequence identity to the corresponding human 
receptors while they have 31% amino acid sequence identify between them. 
Essential amino acid residues for ligand binding, signal transduction and 
receptor conformation, which have been shown in mammalian MCH-R, are well 
conserved in the flounder MCH-Rs. MCH-R1 has one intron in the extracellular 
N-terminal region and MCH-R2 has one intron in the DRY motif, which is a 
homologous position to one of the five introns of human MCH-R2. Orthologues of 
MCH-R1 and MCH-R2 may have appeared by gene duplication of the ancestry of 
MCH-Rs having at least two introns, and then MCH-R1 and MCH-R2 inherited 
different introns in flounder strains. We also determined their tissue 
distribution and functional role in rearing condition. Reverse transcription PCR 
revealed that the expression of MCH-R1 is confined to the brain of the barfin 
flounder, while transcripts of MCH-R2 were detected in the brain, pituitary, 
eyeball, gill, atrium, ventricle, head kidney, body kidney, spleen, intestine, 
inclinator, skeletal muscle testis, ovary, eyed-side skin, and non-eyed-side 
skin. The expression of MCH-R2 in eyed-side skin was higher in fish reared in a 
black tank (121 days) than in a white tank while the expression levels of MCH in 
the brain were significantly greater in the group reared with the white 
background suggesting down-regulation of this receptor gene with increased 
levels of MCH. The results suggest that the MCH-R2 mediates the effect of MCH to 
control body color for background adaptation in the eyed-side skin of the barfin 
flounder.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2007.01.011
PMID: 17324419 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2007 May 1;17(9):2535-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bmcl.2007.02.012.  Epub 2007 Feb 8.

Thienopyrimidinone bis-aminopyrrolidine ureas as potent melanin-concentrating 
hormone receptor-1 (MCH-R1) antagonists.

Zhang M(1), Tamiya J, Nguyen L, Rowbottom MW, Dyck B, Vickers TD, Grey J, 
Schwarz DA, Heise CE, Haelewyn J, Mistry MS, Goodfellow VS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Pharmacology and Molecular Biology, 
Neurocrine Biosciences Inc., 12790 El Camino Real, San Diego, CA 92130, USA.

A series of thienopyrimidinone bis-aminopyrrolidine ureas were designed, 
synthesized, and evaluated for their ability to bind melanin-concentrating 
hormone receptor-1. These compounds exhibit potent binding affinity (K(i)=3 nM) 
and good in vitro metabolic stability.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2007.02.012
PMID: 17329101 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2007 Apr 15;17(8):2365-71. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2006.11.068. Epub 2006 Dec 1.

Identification of diamino chromone-2-carboxamides as MCHr1 antagonists with 
minimal hERG channel activity.

Judd AS(1), Souers AJ, Wodka D, Zhao G, Mulhern MM, Iyengar RR, Gao J, Lynch JK, 
Freeman JC, Falls HD, Brodjian S, Dayton BD, Reilly RM, Gintant G, Limberis JT, 
Mikhail A, Leitza ST, Houseman KA, Diaz G, Bush EN, Shapiro R, Knourek-Segel V, 
Hernandez LE, Marsh KC, Sham HL, Collins CA, Kym PR.

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Disease Research, Abbott Laboratories, 100 Abbott Park Road, Abbott 
Park, IL 60064, USA. andrew.judd@abbott.com

A series of potent 2-carboxychromone-based melanin-concentrating hormone 
receptor 1 (MCHr1) antagonists were synthesized and evaluated for hERG (human 
Ether-a-go-go Related Gene) channel affinity and functional blockade. Basic 
dialkylamine-terminated analogs were found to weakly bind the hERG channel and 
provided marked improvement in a functional patch-clamp assay versus previously 
reported antagonists of the series.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2006.11.068
PMID: 17350253 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2007 Apr 15;17(8):2361-4. doi:
10.1016/j.bmcl.2006.12.049.  Epub 2006 Dec 21.

Application of the Suzuki-Miyaura cross-coupling to increase antimicrobial 
potency generates promising novel antibacterials.

Haug BE(1), Stensen W, Svendsen JS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Tromsø, N-9037 Tromsø, Norway. 
bengt-erik.haug@farm.uib.no

Antimicrobial peptides have been recognized as a novel class of antibiotics, and 
several candidates are currently in clinical trials. In this work, a tripeptide 
derivative containing 4-iodo phenylalanine has been derivatized through the 
Suzuki-Miyaura cross-coupling. This has enabled the rapid and efficient 
synthesis of an array of tripeptide derivatives encompassing novel biaryl 
moieties. The peptide derivatives show high activity against Gram-positive 
bacteria.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2006.12.049
PMID: 17350833 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2007 Apr 15;17(8):2171-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bmcl.2007.01.104.  Epub 2007 Feb 4.

Synthesis and structure-activity relationships of spirohydantoin-derived 
small-molecule antagonists of the melanin-concentrating hormone receptor-1 
(MCH-R1).

Rowbottom MW(1), Vickers TD, Tamiya J, Zhang M, Dyck B, Grey J, Schwarz D, Heise 
CE, Hedrick M, Wen J, Tang H, Wang H, Fisher A, Aparicio A, Saunders J, 
Goodfellow VS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Neurocrine Biosciences Inc., 12790 El 
Camino Real, San Diego, CA 92130, USA. mrowbottom@neurocrine.com

The design, synthesis, and SAR of a series of substituted spirohydantoins are 
described. Optimization of an in-house screening hit gave compounds that 
exhibited potent binding affinity and functional activity at MCH-R1.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2007.01.104
PMID: 17350839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


147. J Comput Aided Mol Des. 2007 May;21(5):251-67. doi:
10.1007/s10822-007-9112-4.  Epub 2007 Mar 22.

Optimization of biaryl piperidine and 4-amino-2-biarylurea MCH1 receptor 
antagonists using QSAR modeling, classification techniques and virtual 
screening.

Melagraki G(1), Afantitis A, Sarimveis H, Koutentis PA, Markopoulos J, 
Igglessi-Markopoulou O.

Author information:
(1)School of Chemical Engineering, National Technical University of Athens, 
Athens, Greece.

This paper presents the results of an optimization study on biaryl piperidine 
and 4-amino-2-biarylurea MCH1 receptor antagonists, which was accomplished by 
using quantitative-structure activity relationships (QSARs), classification and 
virtual screening techniques. First, a linear QSAR model was developed using 
Multiple Linear Regression (MLR) Analysis, while the Elimination 
Selection-Stepwise Regression (ES-SWR) method was adopted for selecting the most 
suitable input variables. The predictive activity of the model was evaluated 
using an external validation set and the Y-randomization technique. Based on the 
selected descriptors, the Support Vector Machines (SVM) classification technique 
was utilized to classify data into two categories: "actives" or "non-actives". 
Several attempts were made to optimize the scaffold of most potent compounds by 
inducing various structural modifications. Potential derivatives with improved 
activities were identified, as they were classified "actives" by the SVM 
classifier. Their activities were estimated using the produced MLR model. A 
detailed analysis on the model applicability domain defined the compounds, whose 
estimations can be accepted with confidence.

DOI: 10.1007/s10822-007-9112-4
PMID: 17377847 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Bioorg Med Chem. 2007 Jun 1;15(11):3896-911. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2007.02.049.
 Epub 2007 Mar 3.

Novel series of substituted biphenylmethyl urea derivatives as MCH-R1 
antagonists for the treatment of obesity.

Galiano S(1), Ceras J, Cirauqui N, Pérez S, Juanenea L, Rivera G, Aldana I, 
Monge A.

Author information:
(1)Unidad en Investigación y Desarrollo de Medicamentos, Centro de Investigación 
en Farmacobiología Aplicada, University of Navarra, c/Irunlarrea s/n, 31080 
Pamplona, Spain.

We have designed and synthesized two novel series of MCH-R1 antagonists based on 
a substituted biphenylmethyl urea core. SAR was explored, suggesting that 
optimal binding with the receptor was achieved when the biphenylmethyl group and 
the linker were substituted on the same nitrogen of the urea moiety. Compound 
1-(3'-cyano-4-biphenylmethyl)-3-(2-hydroxy-1,1-dimethylethyl)-1-{2-[1-(4-methylbenzyl)-4-piperidinyl]ethyl}urea 
2t showed the best antagonist binding activity to the MCH-R1 with a 43 nM K(i).

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmc.2007.02.049
PMID: 17407817 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2007 Jul 1;17(13):3754-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bmcl.2007.04.012.  Epub 2007 Apr 10.

Design and synthesis of novel hydantoin-containing melanin-concentrating hormone 
receptor antagonists.

Balavoine F(1), Malabre P, Alleaume T, Rey A, Cherfils V, Jeanneton O, 
Seigneurin-Venin S, Revah F.

Author information:
(1)Cerep, 19 avenue du Québec Courtaboeuf 1, 91951 Villebon sur Yvette, France. 
fabrice.balavoine@quantum-genomics.com <fabrice.balavoine@quantum-genomics.com>

We report here new chemical series acting as antagonists of 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHR-1). Synthesis and 
structure-activity relationships are described leading to the identification of 
compounds with optimized in vitro pharmacological and in vitro ADME profiles. In 
vivo activity has been demonstrated in animal models of food intake and 
depression.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2007.04.012
PMID: 17448659 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Br J Pharmacol. 2007 Jul;151(6):900-8. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjp.0707292. Epub
2007  May 21.

Blockade of MCH1 receptor signalling ameliorates obesity and related hepatic 
steatosis in ovariectomized mice.

Gomori A(1), Ishihara A, Ito M, Matsushita H, Ito M, Mashiko S, Iwaasa H, 
Matsuda M, Bednarek MA, Qian S, Macneil DJ, Kanatani A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Tsukuba Research Institute, Banyu Pharmaceutical 
Co. Ltd, Tsukuba, Japan.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a cyclic 
orexigenic neuropeptide predominantly expressed in the lateral hypothalamus. We 
investigated the roles of MCH1 receptor signalling in ovariectomy (OVX)-induced 
obesity in female C57BL/6J mice, an animal model of postmenopausal obesity.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: The effects of blocking signalling via the MCH1 receptor 
on OVX-induced obesity was investigated by using Mch1r deficient (KO) mice and 
chronic treatment with a selective MCH1 receptor antagonist.
KEY RESULTS: OVX induced body weight gain and increases in the weight of 
visceral fat and of liver; these effects were attenuated following OVX in Mch1r 
KO mice. OVX-induced triglyceride (TG) accumulation and elevated expression of 
lipogenic genes were significantly ameliorated in the liver of Mch1r KO mice. In 
agreement with these results, chronic i.c.v. infusion of a selective MCH1 
receptor antagonist significantly reduced body weight gain, visceral fat and 
liver weights in OVX mice, and hepatic TG contents and lipogenic gene expression 
levels were normalized.
CONCLUSION AND IMPLICATIONS: Our results indicate that MCH1 receptor signalling 
is involved in the development of fatty liver, as well as obesity, in OVX mice, 
and suggest a therapeutic potential for MCH1 receptor antagonists in the 
treatment of obesity and fatty liver.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.bjp.0707292
PMCID: PMC2014135
PMID: 17519948 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2007 Aug 1;17(15):4232-41. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2007.05.034. Epub 2007 May 17.

Discovery of cyclopentane- and cyclohexane-trans-1,3-diamines as potent 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 antagonists.

Giordanetto F(1), Karlsson O, Lindberg J, Larsson LO, Linusson A, Evertsson E, 
Morgan DG, Inghardt T.

Author information:
(1)Lead Generation, Computational Chemistry, AstraZeneca R&D Mölndal, SE-431 83 
Mölndal, Sweden. fabrizio.giordanetto@astrazeneca.com

We herein report the optimization of cyclopentane- and cyclohexane-1,3-diamine 
derivatives as novel and potent MCH-R1 antagonists. Structural modifications of 
the 2-amino-quinoline and thiophene moieties found in the initial lead compound 
served to improve its metabolic stability profile and MCH-R1 affinity, and 
revealed unprecedented SAR when compared to other 2-amino-quinoline-containing 
MCH-R1 antagonists.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2007.05.034
PMID: 17532215 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2007 Aug;31(8):1325-37. doi: 
10.1111/j.1530-0277.2007.00427.x. Epub 2007 Jun 5.

Alcohol drinking in MCH receptor-1-deficient mice.

Duncan EA(1), Sorrell JE, Adamantidis A, Rider T, Jandacek RJ, Seeley RJ, Lakaye 
B, Woods SC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.

BACKGROUND: Recently, we demonstrated that exogenous melanin-concentrating 
hormone (MCH) increases alcohol drinking in rats when administered into the 
brain. However, because the physiological relevance of this finding is unclear, 
we tested the hypothesis that endogenous MCH signaling enhances alcohol 
consumption.
METHODS: Alcohol intake was assessed in male and female wildtype (WT), 
heterozygous (HET), and homozygous MCH receptor-1-deficient (KO) mice. Mice were 
given 24-hour access to a series of alcohol-containing solutions. Following 
this, the mice were given limited (1-hour) access to 10% alcohol. Finally, mice 
were allowed 24-hour access to sucrose/quinine as a caloric control and a means 
to assess taste preference. A naïve cohort of male WT and KO mice was tested for 
alcohol clearance following intraperitoneal administration of 3 g/kg alcohol. 
Another naïve cohort of female mice was utilized to confirm that 
intracerebroventricular administration of MCH (5 microg) would augment alcohol 
drinking in mice.
RESULTS: Exogenous MCH enhanced 10% alcohol consumption in mice 
(saline=0.45+/-0.08 g/kg, 5 microg MCH=0.94+/-0.20 g/kg). Male KO mice consumed 
more 10% alcohol (11.50+/-1.31 g/kg) than WT (6.26+/-1.23 g/kg) and HET mice 
(6.49+/-1.23 g/kg) during ad libitum access. However, alcohol intake was similar 
among genotypes during 1 hour daily access. Male KO mice tended to consume less 
17.75% sucrose+1.3 mM quinine than controls (WT=10.5+/-3.6, HET=7.5+/-1.7, 
KO=4.4+/-0.9 g/kg). Alcohol metabolism was similar between WT and KO mice.
CONCLUSIONS: The finding that male KO consume more alcohol than WT and HET mice, 
are reminiscent of the counterintuitive reports that KO mice are hyperphagic and 
yet eat more when administered exogenous MCH. Changes in taste preference or 
alcohol metabolism do not appear to be important for the increased alcohol 
drinking in KO mice.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1530-0277.2007.00427.x
PMID: 17550369 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Cell Signal. 2007 Sep;19(9):1919-27. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2007.05.001.
Epub  2007 May 17.

Receptor-coupling properties of the invertebrate visual guanine nucleotide 
binding protein iGqalpha.

Go L(1), Mitchell J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Invertebrate visual iG(q)alpha is homologous to mammalian mG(q)alpha in two of 
the three domains important for G protein interaction with receptors; the 
C-terminus and the linker regions that connect the helical and ras-like domains 
of the alpha subunit. The third receptor-interacting domain, the N-terminus, 
contains a six amino acid extension MTLESI in mG(q)alpha that is not present in 
iG(q)alpha. In co-expression studies we assessed the promiscuity and efficacy of 
receptor coupling to phospholipase C (PLC) by iG(q)alpha, a non-palmitoylated 
mutant iG(q)alpha(C3,4A), mG(q)alpha and G(15)alpha. The invertebrate G proteins 
and mG(q)alpha only coupled to G(q)-coupled receptors (m1 muscarinic 
acetylcholine receptor (mChR1), alpha(1A)-adrenergic receptor (alpha1-AR)) and 
not to the G(i/s)-coupled receptors (CCR1 receptor, beta2-adrenergic receptor or 
dopamine D1 receptor) while G(15)alpha coupled to all receptors. iG(q)alpha and 
iG(q)alpha(C3,4A) both had double the efficacy for PLC activation compared to 
the mammalian G proteins when co-expressed with mChR1 and alpha1-AR. The 
increased efficacy of iG(q)alpha compared to mG(q)alpha was also seen downstream 
of PLC with carbachol stimulation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase, 
ERK1/2. Addition of the MTLESI extension onto the N-terminus of iG(q)alpha 
decreased its efficacy by 35% whereas deletion of this sequence from mG(q)alpha 
increased its efficacy by 60% in the PLC and ERK1/2 assays. iG(q)alpha, 
iG(q)alpha(C3,4A) and mG(q)alpha all displayed similar receptor-independent 
AlF(4)(-)activation of PLC and guanosine triphosphate hydrolysis (GTPase) 
activity. iG(q)alpha, and iG(q)alpha(C3,4A) both had increased 
receptor-activated guanosine 5'-[gamma-[(35)S]thio]triphosphate 
([(35)S]GTPgammaS) binding when compared to mG(q)alpha when co-expressed with 
the mChR1. These results demonstrate that G(q) protein efficacy is at least 
partially determined by the presence of the amino-terminal MTLESI extension. 
Comparison of [(35)S]GTPgammaS binding rates helps explain the increased 
efficacy of the invertebrate G proteins.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2007.05.001
PMID: 17560078 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2007 Sep 1;17(17):4845-50. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2007.06.048. Epub 2007 Jun 17.

Synthesis of novel bicyclo[4.1.0]heptane and bicyclo[3.1.0]hexane derivatives as 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptor R1 antagonists.

Su J(1), Tang H, McKittrick BA, Gu H, Guo T, Qian G, Burnett DA, Clader JW, 
Greenlee WJ, Hawes BE, O'neill K, Spar B, Weig B, Kowalski T, Sorota S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical Research, Schering-Plough Research Institute K15 2545, 
Kenilworth, NJ 07033, USA. jing.su@spcorp.com

To address the hERG liability of MCHR1 antagonists such as 1 and 2, new analogs 
such as 4 and 5 that incorporated a polar heteroaryl group were designed and 
synthesized. Biological evaluation confirmed that these new analogs retained MCH 
R1 activity with greatly attenuated hERG liabilities as indicated in the Rb 
efflux assay.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2007.06.048
PMID: 17604169 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Nihon Yakurigaku Zasshi. 2007 Jul;130(1):34-8. doi: 10.1254/fpj.130.34.

[Role of MCH-MCH receptor system in feeding and depression].

[Article in Japanese]

Saito Y(1).

Author information:
(1)yumist@hiroshima-u.ac.jp

DOI: 10.1254/fpj.130.34
PMID: 17634678 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Life Sci. 2007 Jul 19;81(6):423-40. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2007.05.029. Epub
2007  Jun 27.

Anti-obesity effects of small molecule melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 
(MCHR1) antagonists.

Luthin DR(1).

Author information:
(1)Samford University, McWhorter School of Pharmacy, 800 Lakeshore Drive, 
Birmingham, AL 35229, USA. drluthin@samford.edu

Over the past ten years, tremendous advances in our understanding of the role of 
the hypothalamic neurohormone, melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH), and its 
involvement in the regulation of food intake and body weight have been achieved. 
The MCHR1 receptor has been actively targeted as a much-needed, novel treatment 
for obesity, a disease of epidemic proportion in the United States. Numerous 
companies have joined the competition to be the first to produce a small 
molecule antagonist targeting MCHR1 receptors in the race for therapeutics for 
this disease. This review details the rising need for new treatments for 
obesity; the rationale and target validation of MCHR1 receptor antagonists as 
potential treatments for this disease; and the current status of the numerous 
small molecule MCHR1 antagonists in development by different companies. MCHR1 
antagonists might find an additional usage in the treatment of anxiety and 
depression disorders. The rationale and current status of this effort by several 
companies is also reviewed.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lfs.2007.05.029
PMID: 17655875 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


157. BioDrugs. 2007;21(5):311-21. doi: 10.2165/00063030-200721050-00003.

Melanin-concentrating hormone receptor-1 antagonists as antiobesity 
therapeutics: current status.

Kowalski TJ(1), Sasikumar T.

Author information:
(1)Department of CV/Metabolic Diseases, Schering-Plough Research Institute, 
Kenilworth, New Jersey 07033, USA. timothy.kowalsk@spcorp.com

There is compelling genetic and pharmacologic evidence to indicate that 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptor-1 (MCHR1) signaling is involved in the 
regulation of food intake and energy expenditure. The medical need for novel 
therapies to treat obesity and related metabolic disorders has led to a great 
deal of interest by pharmaceutical companies in the discovery of MCHR1 
antagonists. Recent publications describing preclinical studies have 
demonstrated that small-molecule MCHR1 antagonists decrease food intake, 
bodyweight, and adiposity in rodent models of obesity. Results from ongoing 
early-stage clinical trials with MCHR1 antagonists are eagerly awaited, as is 
the movement of other MCHR1 antagonists into the clinic.

DOI: 10.2165/00063030-200721050-00003
PMID: 17896837 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Curr Top Med Chem. 2007;7(15):1440-54. doi: 10.2174/156802607782194752.

Melanin concentrating hormone receptor antagonists as antiobesity agents: from 
M2 to MCHR-1.

McBriar MD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical Research, Schering-Plough Research Institute, 2015 
Galloping Hill Road, Kenilworth, NJ 07033-1300, USA. mark.mcbriar@spcorp.com

Melanin concentrating hormone (MCH) is a cyclic, nonadecapeptide expressed in 
the CNS of all vertebrates that regulates feeding behavior and energy 
homeostasis. The MCH-1 receptor (MCH-R1) has been identified as a key target in 
MCH regulation, as small molecule antagonists of MCH-R1 have demonstrated 
activity in vivo. Herein, we chronicle our efforts to optimize a hit identified 
via high throughput screening of our proprietary compound library. Several 
challenges such as selectivity over other receptors, toxicity of a potential 
metabolite and determining receptor occupancy via a medium throughput assay will 
be reviewed.

DOI: 10.2174/156802607782194752
PMID: 17897031 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Curr Top Med Chem. 2007;7(15):1471-88. doi: 10.2174/156802607782194699.

Lead optimization strategies and tactics applied to the discovery of melanin 
concentrating hormone receptor 1 antagonists.

Kym PR(1), Judd AS, Lynch JK, Iyengar R, Vasudevan A, Souers AJ.

Author information:
(1)Global Pharmaceutical Research and Development, Abbott Laboratories, 100 
Abbott Park Road, Abbott Park, IL 60064, USA. phil.kym@abbott.com

The discovery of small molecule melanin concentrating hormone receptor (MCHr1) 
antagonists as novel therapeutic agents for the treatment of obesity has been 
actively pursued across the pharmaceutical industry. While multiple chemotypes 
of small molecule MCHr1 antagonists have been identified and shown to deliver 
weight loss in animal models of obesity, many of these lead compounds have been 
found to cross-react with the hERG channel and/or demonstrate deleterious 
effects on cardiovascular hemodynamic parameters. This review describes an 
approach to rapidly identifying safer MCHr1 antagonists by placing assays to 
assess cardiovascular safety early in the lead optimization compound 
prioritization process. Ultimately, despite putting significant effort toward 
the discovery of a MCHr1 antagonist for the treatment of obesity, we were unable 
to deliver a candidate compound that attained an acceptable therapeutic index 
(TI = 30-100) in our in vivo models. Our inability to identify a compound with 
an acceptable therapeutic index was driven by two primary factors: 1) high 
levels of sustained drug exposure in the brain was required to achieve efficacy; 
and 2) many small molecule MCHR1 receptor antagonists suffer from receptor 
cross-reactivity that leads to cardiovascular toxicity at low multiples of their 
therapeutic plasma concentration.

DOI: 10.2174/156802607782194699
PMID: 17897033 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


160. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2008 Jan;324(1):206-13. doi: 10.1124/jpet.107.130435.
Epub  2007 Oct 11.

Small-molecule melanin-concentrating hormone-1 receptor antagonists require 
brain penetration for inhibition of food intake and reduction in body weight.

Eric Hu X(1), Wos JA, Dowty ME, Suchanek PM, Ji W, Chambers JB, Benoit SC, Clegg 
DJ, Reizes O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic 
Foundation, 9500 Euclid Avenue, NC10, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

The melanin-concentrating hormone-1 receptor (MCH1R) is a G-protein-coupled 
receptor expressed in the brain and peripheral tissues that regulates energy 
storage and body weight. Here, we focused on discovery of the mechanism and site 
of action for a small-molecule MCH1R antagonist, which yields weight loss in a 
mouse model of human obesity. MCH1R is expressed throughout the brain but also 
found in peripheral tissues known to regulate fat storage and utilization, e.g., 
skeletal muscle and adipose tissue. Previous studies of MCH1R antagonist studies 
have not delineated the site that is critical for mediating the anorexigenic and 
weight-reducing actions. In this study, we evaluated the role of the brain and 
peripheral tissue receptors. We developed a novel nonbrain-permeable MCH 
antagonist analog with a carboxylic acid moiety to specifically test the site of 
action. Based on in vitro and in vivo assays, the analog is not able to cross 
the blood-brain barrier and does not lead to inhibition of food intake and 
reduced body weight. The data clearly demonstrate that MCH1R antagonists need 
access to the brain to reduce body weight and fat mass. The brain-permeable 
MCH1R antagonist leads to significant reduction in body weight and fat mass in 
diet-induced obese mice. The effect is dose-dependent and appears to be 
partially driven by a reduction in food intake. Finally, these studies show the 
utility of a medicinal chemistry approach to address an important biological and 
pharmacological question.

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.107.130435
PMID: 17932246 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Drug Discov Today. 2007 Nov;12(21-22):972-9. doi:
10.1016/j.drudis.2007.08.010.  Epub 2007 Oct 18.

MCH-R1 antagonists: what is keeping most research programs away from the clinic?

Méndez-Andino JL(1), Wos JA.

Author information:
(1)Procter & Gamble Pharmaceuticals, New Technology Development, 8700 
Mason-Montgomery Road, Mason, OH 45039, USA. mendezandino.jl@pg.com

Despite the high number of drug-discovery programs dedicated to finding 
small-molecule MCH-R1 antagonists for the treatment of obesity and/or mood 
disorders, a very limited number of these have progressed into the clinic. 
Beyond the common challenges in drug design related to ADME and safety profiles, 
cardiovascular risk involving hERG binding and the potential for subsequent 
drug-induced QTc prolongation has been a major hurdle for a significant number 
of MCH-R1 research programs. Many of these programs have evolved, and 
effectively designed MCH antagonists having decreased hERG-binding affinity have 
emerged. Currently, however, only a selected few candidates have progressed to 
clinical development. Drug-design strategies, in vivo efficacy, ADME, and 
cardiovascular safety profiles for a selection of MCH-R1 antagonist research 
programs are discussed ahead.

DOI: 10.1016/j.drudis.2007.08.010
PMID: 17993417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2008 Feb;88(4):446-55. doi:
10.1016/j.pbb.2007.10.001.  Epub 2007 Oct 10.

Deletion of Melanin-Concentrating Hormone Receptor-1 gene accentuates 
D-amphetamine-induced psychomotor activation but neither the subsequent 
development of sensitization nor the expression of conditioned activity in mice.

Tyhon A(1), Lakaye B, Grisar T, Tirelli E.

Author information:
(1)Centre de Neurosciences Cognitives et Comportementales, Université de Liège, 
Belgium.

The present study aimed to test the hypothesis that mice lacking the MCHR1 
receptor (Melanin-Concentrating Hormone Receptor-1) present an elevated 
vulnerability towards the neurobehavioural effects of D-amphetamine, presumably 
due to previously established up-regulations of dopamine D1 receptors in these 
mice. We examined the psychomotor effects of five once-daily injections of 1.5 
and 3 mg/kg D-amphetamine (i.p.) or ten once-daily injections of 2.25 mg/kg 
D-amphetamine in knockout (KO) mice lacking the MCHR1 receptor. The first 
injection of D-amphetamine induced a greater psychomotor response amongst the KO 
mice at 2.25 and 3.0 mg/kg. On all subsequent d-amphetamine injections, KO mice 
still showed greater levels of psychomotor activity than the WT mice, but with 
no between-genotype difference in the rate of development of sensitization 
(similar slopes of the curves). Furthermore, 24 h after the last injection of 
2.25 mg/kg D-amphetamine both genotypes exhibited a significant 
post-sensitization conditioned activity. Thus, MCHR1 receptors are likely not 
deeply involved in the mechanisms of induction of sensitization and related 
conditioned activity induced by D-amphetamine, albeit our results confirm a 
contribution of these receptors to the mechanisms of the acute effects of that 
drug, possibly via an inhibitory action on the dopaminergic mesolimbic system. 
Our results do not support the hypothesis of a functional contribution of MCHR1 
receptors to the addictive effects of D-amphetamine.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pbb.2007.10.001
PMID: 17996928 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Org Chem. 2007 Dec 7;72(25):9648-55. doi: 10.1021/jo701894v. Epub 2007 Nov
13.

Stereoselective synthesis of a MCHr1 antagonist.

Andersen D(1), Storz T, Liu P, Wang X, Li L, Fan P, Chen X, Allgeier A, Burgos 
A, Tedrow J, Baum J, Chen Y, Crockett R, Huang L, Syed R, Larsen RD, Martinelli 
M.

Author information:
(1)Chemistry Process Research and Development, Amgen Inc., Thousand Oaks, 
California 19320, USA. danders555@yahoo.com

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is implicated in the feeding behavior in 
mammals affording a potential target to control overeating in people. Compound 1 
(AMG 076) has been identified as a potent MCHr1 antagonist for the treatment of 
obesity. A synthesis suitable for the large-scale preparation of this lead 
candidate was developed to support preclinical studies. A Robinson annulation of 
benzylpiperidone and resolution of the desired enone from a mixture of the 
diastereomers afforded key intermediate 6 after a stereoselective hydrogenation. 
Subsequent Fischer indole synthesis with hydrazine 5 then provided the advanced 
intermediate, indole 2. Two complementary reductive amination strategies 
employing either aldehyde 3 or lactol 4 led to the synthesis of title compound 
1.

DOI: 10.1021/jo701894v
PMID: 17997573 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Synapse. 2008 Feb;62(2):128-36. doi: 10.1002/syn.20473.

Behavioral and biochemical responses to d-amphetamine in MCH1 receptor knockout 
mice.

Smith DG(1), Qi H, Svenningsson P, Wade M, Davis RJ, Gehlert DR, Nomikos GG.

Author information:
(1)Eli Lilly and Company, Neuroscience Discovery Research, Indianapolis, Indiana 
46285, USA. dgs@lundbeck.com

The melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) system is anatomically and functionally 
interlaced with the mesocorticolimbic dopamine system. Therefore, we 
investigated whether MCH(1) receptor knockout (KO) mice are more susceptible 
than wild-type (WT) mice to psychostimulant-induced locomotor stimulation and 
sensitization, dopamine receptor-mediated phosphorylation events and c-fos 
expression within the frontal cortex and ventral striatum. MCH(1) receptor KO 
mice have 20% higher basal locomotor activity, are hypersensitive to the 
locomotor activating effects of d-amphetamine (1 mg/kg), and develop behavioral 
sensitization to a regimen of repeated d-amphetamine administration that does 
not induce sensitization in WT mice. In addition, d-amphetamine-mediated 
regulation of p44-mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) phosphorylation within 
the frontal cortex was significantly enhanced in MCH(1) receptor KO mice, when 
compared with WT mice. No significant genotype difference in the effects of 
d-amphetamine on MAPK phosphorylation events within the ventral striatum, 
phosphorylation at Ser(897) of the NR1 subunit of the NMDA receptor or Ca(2+) 
and cyclic AMP response-element binding-protein (CREB) at Ser(133) in the 
frontal cortex was detected. d-Amphetamine (3 mg/kg) increased c-fos expression 
within the frontal cortex in MCH(1) receptor KO mice, but not WT mice. There 
were no d-amphetamine-induced changes in c-fos expression within the 
ventromedial striatum in KO or WT mice. Overall, MCH(1) receptor KO mice are 
hypersensitive to the behavioral and molecular effects of the dopaminergic 
psychostimulant d-amphetamine. Increased frontal cortical MAPK phosphorylation 
and c-fos expression in MCH(1) receptor KO mice indicates that the MCH(1) 
receptor may be an important target for treating neuropsychiatric disorders 
characterized by frontal cortex dysfunction, including depression, attention 
deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and schizophrenia.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/syn.20473
PMID: 18000809 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Eur J Pharmacol. 2008 Jan 28;579(1-3):177-88. doi:
10.1016/j.ejphar.2007.10.017.  Epub 2007 Oct 23.

Blocking melanin-concentrating hormone MCH1 receptor affects rat sleep-wake 
architecture.

Ahnaou A(1), Drinkenburg WH, Bouwknecht JA, Alcazar J, Steckler T, Dautzenberg 
FM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, RED Europe Johnson & Johnson Pharmaceutical 
Research and Development, Turnhoutseweg 30, B-2340 Beerse, Belgium. 
aahnaou@prd.jnj.com

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a hypothalamic peptide that centrally 
regulates food intake, energy balance and emotion. Interestingly, MCH and 
melanin-concentrating hormone MCH(1) receptors are distributed in brain areas 
known to regulate vigilance states. Effects of subcutaneous administration of 
two selective melanin-concentrating hormone MCH(1) receptor antagonists, labeled 
A and B were examined over a broad dose range (1, 3, 10, 20, 40 mg/kg) on rat 
sleep-wake architecture. Both compounds have a nanomolar antagonist activity at 
recombinant human melanin-concentrating hormone MCH(1) receptor 
(IC(50)=44.1+/-6.1 nM and 26.6+/-5.4 nM, respectively) and potently inhibited 
the MCH-induced mobilization of [Ca(2+)] (IC(50) 29.1+/-8.1 nM and 10.5+/-4.1 
nM, respectively). The selectivity of both compounds was further confirmed on a 
panel of receptors, transporters and channels. In vivo, both compounds 
dose-dependently decreased deep sleep primarily by decreasing the mean duration 
of episodes during the first 4 h post-administration. In parallel, REM sleep and 
intermediate stage sleep were decreased while active and passive waking 
increased. Deep sleep and REM sleep onset latencies were significantly prolonged 
at higher doses. No homeostatic rebound of deep sleep was observed, while a 
tendency for recovery of REM sleep was found during subsequent dark phase. 
Together, the results support a role of the melanin-concentrating hormone MCH(1) 
receptor in the regulation of deep slow-wave sleep-REM sleep cycle. Therapeutic 
application of melanin-concentrating hormone MCH(1) receptor-inhibiting agents 
should take into account the significant decreases in deep sleep without 
recovery as these may interfere with sleep dependent memory consolidation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2007.10.017
PMID: 18062961 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2007 Dec;15(12):2902-7. doi: 10.1038/oby.2007.345.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms of the MCHR1 gene do not affect metabolism in 
humans.

Rutanen J(1), Pihlajamäki J, Vänttinen M, Salmenniemi U, Ruotsalainen E, 
Kuulasmaa T, Kainulainen S, Kuusisto J, Laakso M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Kuopio and Kuopio University Hospital, 
70210 Kuopio, Finland.

Melanin concentrating hormone receptor-1 (MCHR1) is a centrally and peripherally 
expressed receptor that regulates energy expenditure and appetite. Single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of the MCHR1 gene have been previously 
associated with obesity, but the results are inconsistent among different 
populations. This study was performed to determine whether SNPs of MCHR1 affect 
glucose and energy metabolism. We screened six SNPs of MCHR1 in a 
cross-sectional study of 217 middle-age, non-diabetic Finnish subjects who were 
offspring of type 2 diabetic patients. Insulin secretion was evaluated by an 
intravenous glucose tolerance test and insulin sensitivity and energy metabolism 
by the hyperinsulinemic euglycemic clamp and indirect calorimetry. SNPs of MCHR1 
were not associated with BMI, waist circumference, subcutaneous or 
intra-abdominal fat area, glucose tolerance, first-phase insulin release, 
insulin sensitivity, or energy metabolism. One SNP, which was in >0.50 linkage 
disequilibrium with the other five SNPs, was also screened in 1455 unrelated 
Finnish middle-age subjects in a population-based study. No differences in BMI, 
waist circumference, or glucose or insulin levels in an oral glucose tolerance 
test among the genotypes were found. In conclusion, SNPs of MCHR1 did not have 
effects on metabolic variables in humans.

DOI: 10.1038/oby.2007.345
PMID: 18198296 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Med Chem. 2008 Feb 14;51(3):581-8. doi: 10.1021/jm070759m. Epub 2008 Jan
17.

Discovery of novel chemotypes to a G-protein-coupled receptor through 
ligand-steered homology modeling and structure-based virtual screening.

Cavasotto CN(1), Orry AJ, Murgolo NJ, Czarniecki MF, Kocsi SA, Hawes BE, O'Neill 
KA, Hine H, Burton MS, Voigt JH, Abagyan RA, Bayne ML, Monsma FJ Jr.

Author information:
(1)MolSoft LLC, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. Claudio.N.Cavasotto@uth.tmc.edu

Melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCH-R1) is a G-protein-coupled 
receptor (GPCR) and a target for the development of therapeutics for obesity. 
The structure-based development of MCH-R1 and other GPCR antagonists is hampered 
by the lack of an available experimentally determined atomic structure. A 
ligand-steered homology modeling approach has been developed (where information 
about existing ligands is used explicitly to shape and optimize the binding 
site) followed by docking-based virtual screening. Top scoring compounds 
identified virtually were tested experimentally in an MCH-R1 competitive binding 
assay, and six novel chemotypes as low micromolar affinity antagonist "hits" 
were identified. This success rate is more than a 10-fold improvement over 
random high-throughput screening, which supports our ligand-steered method. 
Clearly, the ligand-steered homology modeling method reduces the uncertainty of 
structure modeling for difficult targets like GPCRs.

DOI: 10.1021/jm070759m
PMID: 18198821 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Recent Pat CNS Drug Discov. 2006 Jan;1(1):1-27. doi:
10.2174/157488906775245318.

Non-monoamine-based approach for the treatment of depression and anxiety 
disorders.

Chaki S(1), Okubo T, Sekiguchi Y.

Author information:
(1)Medicinal Research Laboratories, Taisho Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., 1-403 
Yoshino-cho, Kita-ku, Saitama, Saitama 331-9530, Japan. 
s.chaki@po.rd.taisho.co.jp

Although currently prescribed antidepressants with actions mediated through 
alteration of monoaminergic transmission have been proven to be useful for the 
treatment of depressive and anxiety disorders, they are far from ideal due to 
their slow onset of action and low rate of responses. Although the brain 
monoamine systems have long been the focus of drug therapy for depression and 
anxiety disorders, current drug discovery has aimed at new molecular targets 
outside the monoamine systems to overcome these problems. Recent increase in 
understanding of the molecular mechanisms of depression and anxiety has provided 
alternative molecular targets for these disorders. In particular, receptors 
within the glutamate, gamma-aminobutyric acid and neuropeptide systems provide a 
diversity of drug targets, and molecular biological and behavioral studies of 
these receptors have revealed the important roles they play in depression and 
anxiety. Here, we review recent patents and advances in research on these 
emerging molecular targets for the treatment of depression and anxiety, and 
discuss their advantages over currently used antidepressants and anxiolytics.

DOI: 10.2174/157488906775245318
PMID: 18221188 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Recent Pat CNS Drug Discov. 2006 Nov;1(3):305-14. doi: 
10.2174/157488906778773616.

The hypothalamus and obesity.

Harrold JA(1), Halford JC.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, L69 7ZA, UK. 
harrold@liverpool.ac.uk

Obesity has reached epidemic proportions across the developed world. Even though 
there have been numerous scientific advances in terms of the understanding of 
the regulation of energy homeostasis, few novel anti-obesity drugs have emerged. 
Furthermore, those that are available have limited efficacy in producing and 
maintaining a weight loss beyond 10%. This is partly attributable to the complex 
neuronal circuitry at play within the central nervous system and periphery, 
which acts to regulate food intake and energy expenditure. This article will 
focus on a selection of the many products (peptides, neurotransmitters and 
others) such as endocannabinoids, Neuropeptide Y, Orexins, Melanin-Concentrating 
Hormone, Melanocortins, Cocaine and Amphetamine Regulated Transcript and 
Serotonin, expressed within the brain, that have been shown to influence energy 
balance. The true relevance of many of these to the regulation of human energy 
balance remains uncertain, but some novel anti-obesity drugs aimed at these 
targets are likely to emerge in the next few years.

DOI: 10.2174/157488906778773616
PMID: 18221212 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Results Probl Cell Differ. 2008;46:159-79. doi: 10.1007/400_2007_052.

The melanin-concentrating hormone system and its physiological functions.

Saito Y(1), Nagasaki H.

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Integrated Arts and Sciences, Hiroshima University, 
Hiroshima, Japan. yumist@hiroshima-u.ac.jp

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a neuropeptide that was originally 
isolated from salmon pituitary where it causes pigment aggregation. MCH is also 
abundantly present in mammalian neurons and expressed in the lateral 
hypothalamus and zona incerta, brain regions that are known to be at the center 
of feeding behavior. MCH binds to and activates two G protein-coupled receptors, 
MCH1R and MCH2R. Although MCH2R is non-functional in rodents, genetic and 
pharmacological studies have demonstrated that rodent MCH1R is involved in the 
regulation of feeding behavior and energy balance. Unexpectedly, some 
antagonists have provided evidence that MCH signaling participates in the 
regulation of other processes, such as emotion and stress. The discovery of MCH 
receptors has extensively promoted the progress of MCH studies and may represent 
an ideal example of how deorphanized receptors can open new directions toward 
more detailed physiological studies.

DOI: 10.1007/400_2007_052
PMID: 18227983 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2008 Feb 15;18(4):1402-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bmcl.2008.01.010.  Epub 2008 Jan 8.

Potent, selective MCH-1 receptor antagonists.

Erickson SD(1), Banner B, Berthel S, Conde-Knape K, Falcioni F, Hakimi I, 
Hennessy B, Kester RF, Kim K, Ma C, McComas W, Mennona F, Mischke S, Orzechowski 
L, Qian Y, Salari H, Tengi J, Thakkar K, Taub R, Tilley JW, Wang H.

Author information:
(1)Discovery Chemistry, Hoffmann-La Roche, Inc., 340 Kingsland Street, Nutley, 
NJ 07110, USA.

This paper describes the lead optimization of a new series of potent, selective, 
orally bioavailable, brain-penetrant MCH-1 receptor antagonists. A major focus 
of the work was to achieve a selectivity profile appropriate for in vivo 
efficacy studies and safety.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2008.01.010
PMID: 18243691 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Mol Biol Cell. 2008 Apr;19(4):1540-7. doi: 10.1091/mbc.e07-09-0942. Epub
2008  Feb 6.

Identification of ciliary localization sequences within the third intracellular 
loop of G protein-coupled receptors.

Berbari NF(1), Johnson AD, Lewis JS, Askwith CC, Mykytyn K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Division of Human Genetics, and College of 
Medicine, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Primary cilia are sensory organelles present on most mammalian cells. The 
functions of cilia are defined by the signaling proteins localized to the 
ciliary membrane. Certain G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), including 
somatostatin receptor 3 (Sstr3) and serotonin receptor 6 (Htr6), localize to 
cilia. As Sstr3 and Htr6 are the only somatostatin and serotonin receptor 
subtypes that localize to cilia, we hypothesized they contain ciliary 
localization sequences. To test this hypothesis we expressed chimeric receptors 
containing fragments of Sstr3 and Htr6 in the nonciliary receptors Sstr5 and 
Htr7, respectively, in ciliated cells. We found the third intracellular loop of 
Sstr3 or Htr6 is sufficient for ciliary localization. Comparison of these loops 
revealed a loose consensus sequence. To determine whether this consensus 
sequence predicts ciliary localization of other GPCRs, we compared it with the 
third intracellular loop of all human GPCRs. We identified the consensus 
sequence in melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (Mchr1) and confirmed Mchr1 
localizes to primary cilia in vitro and in vivo. Thus, we have identified a 
putative GPCR ciliary localization sequence and used this sequence to identify a 
novel ciliary GPCR. As Mchr1 mediates feeding behavior and metabolism, our 
results implicate ciliary signaling in the regulation of body weight.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.e07-09-0942
PMCID: PMC2291422
PMID: 18256283 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Biol Psychiatry. 2008 Aug 1;64(3):184-91. doi:
10.1016/j.biopsych.2007.12.011.  Epub 2008 Feb 20.

Dysregulation of the mesolimbic dopamine system and reward in MCH-/- mice.

Pissios P(1), Frank L, Kennedy AR, Porter DR, Marino FE, Liu FF, Pothos EN, 
Maratos-Flier E.

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess 
Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA. ppissios@bidmc.harvard.edu

BACKGROUND: The hypothalamic neuropeptide melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) 
plays a critical role in energy homeostasis. Abundant expression of the MCH 
receptor is observed outside the hypothalamus, especially in the dorsal and the 
ventral striatum, raising the possibility that MCH modulates the function of the 
midbrain dopamine neurons and associated circuitry.
METHODS: The MCH receptor 1 (MCHR1) expression was assessed by in situ 
hybridization. Expression of dopamine transporter (DAT) and the dopamine D1 and 
D2 receptor (D1R and D2R) subtypes in the caudate-putamen (CPu) and the nucleus 
accumbens (Acb) was evaluated by immunoblotting. Amperometry in ex vivo slices 
of the Acb was used to measure evoked-dopamine release in MCH-/ - mice. 
Catalepsy in MCH+/+ and MCH-/- mice was assessed by the bar test after 
haloperidol injection. Locomotor activity was measured after acute and chronic 
treatment with amphetamine and after dopamine reuptake inhibitor GBR 12909 
administration.
RESULTS: The psychostimulant amphetamine caused enhanced behavioral 
sensitization in MCH-/- mice. We found significantly elevated expression of the 
DAT in the Acb of MCH-/- mice. The DAT-mediated uptake of dopamine was also 
enhanced in MCH-/- mice consistent with increased expression of DAT. We also 
found that evoked dopamine release is significantly increased in the Acb shell 
of MCH-/- mice. The GBR 12909 administration increased the locomotor activity of 
MCH-/- mice significantly above that of MCH+/+ mice.
CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrate that MCH, in addition to its known role 
in feeding and weight regulation, plays a critical role in regulating Acb 
dopamine signaling and related behavioral responses.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2007.12.011
PMID: 18281019 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Mar 18;105(11):4242-6. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0711027105. Epub 2008 Mar 11.

Bardet-Biedl syndrome proteins are required for the localization of G 
protein-coupled receptors to primary cilia.

Berbari NF(1), Lewis JS, Bishop GA, Askwith CC, Mykytyn K.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Pharmacology, Internal Medicine, Division of Human Genetics, 
and Neuroscience, College of Medicine, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 
43210, USA.

Primary cilia are ubiquitous cellular appendages that provide important yet not 
well understood sensory and signaling functions. Ciliary dysfunction underlies 
numerous human genetic disorders. However, the precise defects in cilia function 
and the basis of disease pathophysiology remain unclear. Here, we report that 
the proteins disrupted in the human ciliary disorder Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) 
are required for the localization of G protein-coupled receptors to primary 
cilia on central neurons. We demonstrate a lack of ciliary localization of 
somatostatin receptor type 3 (Sstr3) and melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 
1 (Mchr1) in neurons from mice lacking the Bbs2 or Bbs4 gene. Because Mchr1 is 
involved in the regulation of feeding behavior and BBS is associated with 
hyperphagia-induced obesity, our results suggest that altered signaling caused 
by mislocalization of ciliary signaling proteins underlies the BBS phenotypes. 
Our results also provide a potential molecular mechanism to link cilia defects 
with obesity.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0711027105
PMCID: PMC2393805
PMID: 18334641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


175. Eur J Neurosci. 2008 Apr;27(7):1793-800. doi:
10.1111/j.1460-9568.2008.06129.x.

Sleep architecture of the melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1-knockout 
mice.

Adamantidis A(1), Salvert D, Goutagny R, Lakaye B, Gervasoni D, Grisar T, Luppi 
PH, Fort P.

Author information:
(1)Research Center for Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology, Unit of Molecular 
Neurophysiology, University of Liège, 1 Avenue de l'Hôpital, Bat. B-36, 4000 
Liège, Belgium. tidis@stanford.edu

Growing amounts of data indicate involvement of the posterior hypothalamus in 
the regulation of sleep, especially paradoxical sleep (PS). Accordingly, we 
previously showed that the melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH)-producing neurons 
of the rat hypothalamus are selectively activated during a PS rebound. In 
addition, intracerebroventricular infusion of MCH increases total sleep 
duration, suggesting a new role for MCH in sleep regulation. To determine 
whether activation of the MCH system promotes sleep, we studied spontaneous 
sleep and its homeostatic regulation in mice with deletion of the MCH-receptor 1 
gene (MCH-R1-/- vs. MCH-R1+/+) and their behavioural response to modafinil, a 
powerful antinarcoleptic drug. Here, we show that the lack of functional MCH-R1 
results in a hypersomniac-like phenotype, both in basal conditions and after 
total sleep deprivation, compared to wild-type mice. Further, we found that 
modafinil was less potent at inducing wakefulness in MCH-R1-/- than in MCH-R1+/+ 
mice. We report for the first time that animals with genetically inactivated MCH 
signaling exhibit altered vigilance state architecture and sleep homeostasis. 
This study also suggests that the MCH system may modulate central pathways 
involved in the wake-promoting effect of modafinil.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2008.06129.x
PMID: 18380672 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Curr Med Chem. 2008;15(10):1025-43. doi: 10.2174/092986708784049621.

Melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 antagonists: a new perspective for the 
pharmacologic treatment of obesity.

Rivera G(1), Bocanegra-García V, Galiano S, Cirauqui N, Ceras J, Pérez S, Aldana 
I, Monge A.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Farmacia y Química Medicinal, Universidad Autónoma de 
Tamaulipas, Reynosa, México. gildardors@hotmail.com

Obesity is a chronic disease characterized by the accumulation of excess adipose 
tissue associated with an increased risk of multiple morbidities and mortality. 
At the present time, only three drugs have been approved by the Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) for the treatment of obesity. Agonists and antagonists of 
some of the substances implicated in the regulation of energy homeostasis 
represent opportunities for anti-obesity drug development. The most promising 
targets are alpha-melanocyte stimulating hormone (alpha-MSH) receptors, 
cannabinoid receptors, the 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) receptors and 
melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) receptors. MCH receptors could be major 
potential targets for the treatment of obesity. Many pharmaceutical companies 
have described MCH-R1 antagonists that have appeared over the past year. 
Recently, two compounds went into phase I clinical trials that evaluate MCH 
receptor antagonists as a new perspective for the pharmacologic treatment of 
obesity. In this review, structure-activity relationships (SAR) in the 
development of MCH-R1 antagonists are provided.

DOI: 10.2174/092986708784049621
PMID: 18393860 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2008 Dec;11(8):1105-22. doi: 
10.1017/S1461145708008894. Epub 2008 May 9.

The melanin-concentrating hormone1 receptor antagonists, SNAP-7941 and GW3430, 
enhance social recognition and dialysate levels of acetylcholine in the frontal 
cortex of rats.

Millan MJ(1), Gobert A, Panayi F, Rivet JM, Dekeyne A, Brocco M, Ortuno JC, Di 
Cara B.

Author information:
(1)Division of Psychopharmacology, Institut de Recherches Servier, 
Croissy-sur-Seine, France. mark.millan@fr.netgrs.com

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH)1 receptors are widely expressed in limbic 
structures and cortex. Their inactivation is associated with anxiolytic and 
antidepressive properties but little information is available concerning 
cognition. This issue was addressed using the selective antagonists, SNAP-7941 
and GW3430, in a social recognition paradigm in rats. The muscarinic blocker, 
scopolamine (1.25 mg/kg s.c.), reduced social recognition, an action 
dose-dependently blocked by SNAP-7941 and GW3430 (0.63-10.0 and 20.0-80.0 mg/kg 
i.p., respectively) which did not themselves display amnesic properties. 
Further, in a protocol where a spontaneous deficit was induced by a prolonged 
inter-session delay, SNAP-7941 and GW3430 dose-dependently enhanced social 
recognition. In dialysis studies, SNAP-7941 (0.63-40.0 mg/kg i.p.) and GW3430 
(10.0-40.0 mg/kg i.p.) elevated extracellular levels of acetylcholine (ACh) in 
the frontal cortex (FCX) of freely moving rats. The SNAP-7941 effect was 
specific, as it did not increase levels of ACh in ventral and dorsal 
hippocampus: moreover, it did not modify levels of noradrenaline, dopamine, 
serotonin and glutamate in FCX. Active doses of SNAP-7941 and GW3430 
corresponded to doses (2.5-40.0 and 10.0-80.0 mg/kg i.p., respectively) exerting 
anxiolytic properties in Vogel conflict and ultrasonic vocalization tests, and 
antidepressant actions in forced swim, isolation-induced aggression and 
marble-burying procedures. In contrast to SNAP-7941 and GW3430, the 
benzodiazepine, diazepam, decreased social recognition and dialysate levels of 
ACh, while the tricyclic, imipramine, reduced social recognition and failed to 
enhance cholinergic transmission. In conclusion, at anxiolytic and 
antidepressant doses, SNAP-7941 and GW3430 improve social recognition and 
elevate extracellular ACh levels in FCX. This profile differentiates MCH1 
receptor antagonists from conventional anxiolytic and antidepressant agents.

DOI: 10.1017/S1461145708008894
PMID: 18466669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2008 Jun;29(6):752-8. doi:
10.1111/j.1745-7254.2008.00800.x.

High-throughput screening of novel antagonists on melanin-concentrating hormone 
receptor-1.

Yan JH(1), Li QY, Boutin JA, Renard MP, Ding YX, Hao XJ, Zhao WM, Wang MW.

Author information:
(1)The National Center for Drug Screening and the State Key Laboratory of New 
Drug Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Shanghai 201203, China.

AIM: To find new antagonists on human melanin-concentrating hormone receptor-1 
(MCHR-1) through high-throughput screening (HTS) of a diverse compound library.
METHODS: MCHR-1, [3H]SNAP7941, and FlashBlue G-protein-coupled receptor beads 
were used to measure the receptor-binding activities of various compounds based 
on scintillation proximity assay (SPA) technology. The guanosine 
5'(gamma-[35S]thio) triphosphate ([35S]GTPgammaS) binding assay was subsequently 
applied to functionally characterize the "hits" identified by the HTS campaign.
RESULTS: Of the 48,240 compounds screened with the SPA method, 12 hits were 
confirmed to possess MCHR-1 binding activities, 8 were functionally studied 
subsequently with the [35S]GTPgammaS binding assay, and only 1 compound 
(NC127816) displayed moderate human MCHR-1 binding affinity (Ki=115.7 nmol/L) 
and relatively potent antagonism (KB=23.8 nmol/L). This compound shares a novel 
scaffold (1-ethoxy-2H-2-aza-1-phospha-naphthalene 1-oxide) with 3 other analogs 
in the group.
CONCLUSION: Considering the marked difference in molecular shape and 
electrostatic status between NC127816 and the structures reported elsewhere, we 
anticipate that its derivatives may represent a new class of potent MCHR-1 
modulators.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1745-7254.2008.00800.x
PMID: 18501123 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2008 Sep 1;18(17):4859-63. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2008.07.079. Epub 2008 Jul 24.

Discovery of 1,3-disubstituted-1H-pyrrole derivatives as potent 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCH-R1) antagonists.

Berglund S(1), Egner BJ, Gradén H, Gradén J, Morgan DG, Inghardt T, Giordanetto 
F.

Author information:
(1)Medicinal Chemistry, AstraZeneca R&D Mölndal, Pepparedsleden 1, SE-431 83, 
Mölndal, Sweden.

A series of 1,3-disubstituted-1H-pyrrole-based antagonists of the human 
Melanin-Concentrating Hormone Receptor 1 (h-MCH-R1) are reported. 
High-throughput screening of the AstraZeneca compound collection yielded 1, a 
hit with moderate affinity towards MCH-R1. Subsequent structural manipulations 
and SAR analysis served to rationalize potency requirements, and 12 was 
identified as a novel, functional MCH-R1 antagonist with favorable 
pharmacokinetic properties.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2008.07.079
PMID: 18682323 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Oct 31;375(4):592-5. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.08.038. Epub 2008 Aug 21.

Caveolae as potential mediators of MCH-signaling pathways.

Cook LB(1), Delorme-Axford EB, Robinson K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, 217 Lennon Hall, The College at Brockport, 
State University of New York, 350 New Campus Drive, Brockport, NY 14420, USA. 
lcook@brockport.edu

The melanin-concentrating hormone receptor (MCHR) 1 is a G protein-coupled 
receptor involved in the regulation of appetite and energy expenditure in 
mammals. Here, we show that MCHR1 partitions to lipid rafts in stably expressing 
Chinese hamster ovary cells. In addition to co-fractionating with lipid rafts 
containing caveolin-1 on sucrose gradients, caveolin-1 was present in MCHR1 
immunoprecipitates, suggesting that MCHR1 complexes with caveolae. The 
cholesterol-depleting drug methyl-beta-cyclodextrin impaired MCH-mediated ERK 
signaling. These data suggest that a functional interaction between MCHR1 and 
caveolin-1 in lipid rafts exists and provide a basis for further biochemical 
studies to understand the significance on MCH-mediated signal transduction 
events.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.08.038
PMID: 18722347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]181. Cell Signal. 2008 Nov;20(11):2084-94. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2008.07.019.
Epub  2008 Aug 8.

Regulation of melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 signaling by RGS8 with 
the receptor third intracellular loop.

Miyamoto-Matsubara M(1), Saitoh O, Maruyama K, Aizaki Y, Saito Y.

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Integrated Arts and Sciences, Hiroshima University, 
Kagamiyama, Hiroshima 739-8521, Japan.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) receptor 1 (MCH1R) belongs to the class A G 
protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs). The MCH-MCH1R system plays a central role in 
energy metabolism, and thus the regulation of signaling pathways activated by 
this receptor is of particular interest. Regulator of G protein signaling (RGS) 
proteins work by increasing the GTPase activity of G protein alpha subunits and 
attenuate cellular responses coupled with G proteins. Recent evidence has shown 
that RGS proteins are not simple G protein regulators but equally inhibit the 
signaling from various GPCRs. Here, we demonstrate that RGS8, which is highly 
expressed in the brain, functions as a negative modulator of MCH1R signaling. By 
using biochemical approaches, RGS8 was found to selectively and directly bind to 
the third intracellular (i3) loop of MCH1R in vitro. When expressed in HEK293T 
cells, RGS8 and MCH1R colocalized to the plasma membrane and RGS8 potently 
inhibited the calcium mobilization induced by MCH. The N-terminal 9 amino acids 
of RGS8 were required for the optimal capacity to downregulate the receptor 
signaling. Furthermore, Arg(253) and Arg(256) at the distal end of the i3 loop 
were found to comprise a structurally important site for the functional 
interaction with RGS8, since coexpression of RGS8 with R253Q/R256Q mutant 
receptors resulted in a loss of induction of MCH-stimulated calcium 
mobilization. This functional association suggests that RGS8 may represent a new 
therapeutic target for the development of novel pharmaceutical agents.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2008.07.019
PMID: 18760349 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


182. J Org Chem. 2008 Oct 3;73(19):7651-6. doi: 10.1021/jo801463j. Epub 2008 Sep
4.

Enantioselective synthesis of SNAP-7941: chiral dihydropyrimidone inhibitor of 
MCH1-R.

Goss JM(1), Schaus SE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Life Science and Engineering Building, Boston 
University, 24 Cummington Street, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

An enantioselective synthesis of SNAP-7941, a potent melanin concentrating 
hormone receptor antagonist, was achieved by using two organocatalytic methods. 
The first method utilized to synthesize the enantioenriched dihydropyrimidone 
core was the Cinchona alkaloid-catalyzed Mannich reaction of beta-keto esters to 
acylimines and the second was the chiral phosphoric acid-catalyzed Biginelli 
reaction. Completion of the synthesis was accomplished via selective urea 
formation at the N3 position of the dihydropyrimidone with the 
3-(4-phenylpiperidin-1-yl)propylamine side chain fragment. The synthesis of 
SNAP-7921 highlights the utility of asymmetric organocatalytic methods in the 
construction of an important class of chiral heterocycles.

DOI: 10.1021/jo801463j
PMCID: PMC2666257
PMID: 18767801 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Curr Top Med Chem. 2008;8(13):1152-7. doi: 10.2174/156802608785700052.

Lead optimization of melanin concentrating hormone receptor 1 antagonists with 
low hERG channel activity.

Judd AS(1), Souers AJ, Kym PR.

Author information:
(1)Global Pharmaceutical Research and Development, Abbott Laboratories, 100 
Abbott Park Road, Abbott Park, IL 60064, USA. andrew.judd@abbott.com

The discovery of small molecule melanin concentrating hormone receptor (MHCr1) 
antagonists as novel therapeutic agents has been widely pursued across the 
pharmaceutical industry. While multiple chemotypes of small molecule MCHr1 
antagonists have been identified and shown to induce weight loss in rodent 
models of obesity, many of these lead compounds have been found to cross react 
with the hERG channel. This review describes efforts that led to the 
identification of two sub-series of MCHr1 antagonists with low affinity for the 
hERG channel. Ultimately, however, the modifications introduced to thwart hERG 
channel activity resulted in lead compounds with sub-optimal CNS behavior.

DOI: 10.2174/156802608785700052
PMID: 18782010 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


184. J Neurosci. 2008 Sep 10;28(37):9101-10. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1766-08.2008.

Regulation of synaptic efficacy in hypocretin/orexin-containing neurons by 
melanin concentrating hormone in the lateral hypothalamus.

Rao Y(1), Lu M, Ge F, Marsh DJ, Qian S, Wang AH, Picciotto MR, Gao XB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics/Gynecology and Reproductive Science, Yale University 
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

The lateral hypothalamus (LH) is a central hub that integrates inputs from, and 
sends outputs to, many other brain areas. Two groups of neurons in the LH, 
expressing hypocretin/orexin or melanin concentrating hormone (MCH), have been 
shown to participate in sleep regulation, energy homeostasis, drug addiction, 
motor regulation, stress response, and social behaviors. The elucidation of 
crosstalk between these two systems is essential to understand these behaviors 
and functions because there is evidence that there are reciprocal innervations 
between hypocretin/orexin and MCH neurons. In this study, we used MCH receptor-1 
knock-out (MCHR1 KO) and wild-type (WT) mice expressing green fluorescent 
protein in hypocretin/orexin-containing neurons to examine the hypothesis that 
MCH modulates hypocretin/orexin-mediated effects on behavioral state and 
synaptic transmission in the LH. In MCHR1 KO mice, the efficacy of glutamatergic 
synapses on hypocretin/orexin neurons is potentiated and hypocretin-1-induced 
action potential firing is facilitated, potentially explaining an increased 
effect of modafinil observed in MCHR1 KO mice. In wild-type mice with intact 
MCHR1 signaling, MCH significantly attenuated the hypocretin-1-induced 
enhancement of spike frequency in hypocretin/orexin neurons. The MCH effect was 
dose dependent, pertussis toxin sensitive, and was abolished in MCHR1 KO mice. 
Consistent with this effect, MCH attenuated hypocretin-1-induced enhancement of 
the frequency of miniature EPSCs in hypocretin/orexin neurons. These data from 
MCHR1 KO and WT mice demonstrate a novel interaction between these two systems, 
implying that MCH may exert a unique inhibitory influence on hypocretin/orexin 
signaling as a way to fine-tune the output of the LH.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1766-08.2008
PMCID: PMC2562258
PMID: 18784290 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Gut. 2009 Jan;58(1):34-40. doi: 10.1136/gut.2008.155341. Epub 2008 Sep 29.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) modulates C difficile toxin A-mediated 
enteritis in mice.

Kokkotou E(1), Espinoza DO, Torres D, Karagiannides I, Kosteletos S, Savidge T, 
O'Brien M, Pothoulakis C.

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Dana 501, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, 
Boston, MA 02215, USA. ekokkoto@bidmc.harvard.edu

OBJECTIVE: Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a hypothalamic orexigenic 
neuropeptide that regulates energy balance. However, the distribution of MCH and 
its receptor MCHR1 in tissues other than brain suggested additional, as yet 
unappreciated, roles for this neuropeptide. Based on previous paradigms and the 
presence of MCH in the intestine as well as in immune cells, its potential role 
in gut innate immune responses was examined.
METHODS: In human intestinal xenografts grown in mice, changes in the expression 
of MCH and its receptors following treatment with Clostridium difficile toxin A, 
the causative agent of antibiotic-associated diarrhoea in hospitalised patients, 
were examined. In colonocytes, the effect of C difficile toxin A treatment on 
MCHR1 expression, and of MCH on interleukin 8 (IL8) expression was examined. 
MCH-deficient mice and immunoneutralisation approaches were used to examine the 
role of MCH in the pathogenesis of C difficile toxin A-mediated acute enteritis.
RESULTS: Upregulation of MCH and MCHR1 expression was found in the human 
intestinal xenograft model, and of MCHR1 in colonocytes following exposure to 
toxin A. Treatment of colonocytes with MCH resulted in IL8 transcriptional 
upregulation, implying a link between MCH and inflammatory pathways. In further 
support of this view, MCH-deficient mice developed attenuated toxin A-mediated 
intestinal inflammation and secretion, as did wild-type mice treated with an 
antibody against MCH or MCHR1.
CONCLUSION: These findings signify MCH as a mediator of C difficile-associated 
enteritis and possibly of additional gut pathogens. MCH may mediate its 
proinflammatory effects at least in part by acting on epithelial cells in the 
intestine.

DOI: 10.1136/gut.2008.155341
PMCID: PMC3058236
PMID: 18824554 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None.


186. Eur J Pharmacol. 2008 Dec 3;599(1-3):72-80. doi:
10.1016/j.ejphar.2008.09.027.  Epub 2008 Sep 30.

Amphetamine- and cocaine-induced conditioned place preference and concomitant 
psychomotor sensitization in mice with genetically inactivated 
melanin-concentrating hormone MCH(1) receptor.

Tyhon A(1), Lakaye B, Adamantidis A, Tirelli E.

Author information:
(1)Centre de Neurosciences Cognitives et Comportementales (CNCC), Université de 
Liège, Belgium.

The melanin-concentrating hormone MCH(1) receptor has been proposed to exert an 
inhibitory control on monoaminergic (especially dopaminergic) activity within 
the mesolimbic system, which underpins drug seeking and reward. That hypothesis 
predicts that an inactivation of these receptors should enhance the sensitivity 
to drug rewarding effects. To test that prediction, we examined the propensity 
of mice lacking the melanin-concentrating receptor (MCH(1) KO) and their intact 
counterparts (WT) to form cocaine- and amphetamine-induced conditioned place 
preference. The conditioned rewarding effects induced by 0.375, 0.75, 1.5 and 3 
mg/kg amphetamine were assessed in two sub-experiments and those induced by 1, 
2, 4 and 8 mg/kg cocaine in two other sub-experiments. All mice were tested 
under saline for place preference 24 h following four every-other-day 
conditioning trials and an initial pre-conditioning session under saline. Most 
of the cocaine and amphetamine doses induced place preference, but without any 
genotype difference being revealed. Also, none of the cocaine doses induced 
psychomotor sensitization during conditioning, whereas amphetamine generated 
clear-cut dose-dependent sensitization in both genotypes. Albeit MCH(1) KO mice 
exhibited higher levels of psychomotor activation, the rates of sensitization 
were comparable across genotypes at 1.5 and 3 mg/kg amphetamine. Moreover, 0.375 
and especially 0.75 mg/kg amphetamine produced a slight but yet significant 
sensitization in MCH(1) KO but not in their WT counterparts. Despite such an 
effect, the results cannot be considered as unambiguously supportive of the 
tested prediction.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2008.09.027
PMID: 18848539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


187. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2009 Jan;328(1):165-73. doi: 10.1124/jpet.108.143495.
Epub  2008 Oct 10.

The role of melanin-concentrating hormone-1 receptors in the voiding reflex in 
rats.

Hegde LG(1), Ping XL, Jochnowitz N, Craig DA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Target Discovery and Assessment, Lundbeck Research USA, Inc., 
215 College Road, Paramus, NJ 07652-1431, USA.

We have used the selective melanin-concentrating hormone-1 (MCH(1)) receptor 
antagonist SNAP 7941 [((+)-methyl 
(4S)-3-{[(3-{4-[3-(acetylamino)phenyl]-1-piperidinyl}propyl) 
amino]carbonyl}-4-(3,4-difluorophenyl)-6-(methoxymethyl)-2-oxo-1,2,3,4-tetrahydro-5-pyrimidinecarboxylate 
hydrochloride)] to investigate the role of the hypothalamic neuropeptide MCH in 
the control of voiding in rats. Intravenous administration of SNAP 7941 (3 and 
10 mg/kg i.v.) produced dose-related inhibition of rhythmic, distension-induced 
voiding contractions in anesthetized rats. In conscious rats in which repeated 
voiding cycles were evoked by continuous slow transvesicular infusion of saline, 
intragastric SNAP 7941 [0.03-1 mg/kg intragastrically (i.g.)] produced sustained 
increases in infusion capacity (maximum = 220% basal), comparable with the 
effects of the 5-hydroxytryptamine(1A) antagonist WAY 100635 
(N-[2-[4-(2-methoxyphenyl)-1-piperazinyl]ethyl]-N-2-pyridinyl-cyclohexanecarboxamide 
maleate salt), and the muscarinic antagonist, oxybutynin 
(4-diethylaminobut-2-ynyl 2-cyclohexyl-2-hydroxy-2-phenylacetate hydrochloride). 
SNAP 7941 produced similar results when administered at a low dose (0.01 nmol) 
into the lateral ventricle (intracerebroventricular). The opposite effect was 
produced when MCH (20 nmol) was delivered intracerebroventricularly, resulting 
in a 34% decrease in apparent bladder capacity with increased urinary frequency. 
The effect of MCH was blocked by the prior intragastric administration of SNAP 
7941 (0.1 mg/kg), but oxybutynin (1 mg/kg) was ineffective. Finally, in 
conscious spontaneously hypertensive rats, SNAP 7941 (0.1 mg/kg i.g.) produced a 
31% reduction in micturition frequency, accompanied by a 36% increase in bladder 
capacity, with no effect on total volume voided over 6 h. The data indicate that 
MCH acts via MCH(1) receptors within the CNS to modulate the voiding reflex in 
rats. The striking effects of the MCH(1) antagonist SNAP 7941 to increase 
bladder capacity and reduce voiding frequency indicate that MCH(1) antagonists 
may offer a potential novel approach for treating overactive bladder syndrome.

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.108.143495
PMID: 18849359 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Neurosci Lett. 2009 Jan 30;450(2):132-5. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2008.11.028.
Epub  2008 Nov 14.

Orexins increase mRNA expressions of neurotrophin-3 in rat primary cortical 
neuron cultures.

Yamada N(1), Katsuura G, Tatsuno I, Kawahara S, Ebihara K, Saito Y, Nakao K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine and Clinical Science, Kyoto University Graduate School 
of Medicine, 54 Kawahara-cho, Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan. 
nobukito@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Orexins and melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) as orexigenic neuropeptides are 
present in the lateral hypothalamus, and their receptors are distributed in the 
cerebral cortex and hippocampus. In the present study, the regulatory effects of 
orexin-A, orexin-B and MCH on neurotrophin-3 (NT-3) and brain-derived 
neurotrophic factor (BDNF) expressions were examined in primary cortical neuron 
cultures using quantitative real-time PCR. Both orexin-A and orexin-B on 6-day 
exposure significantly increased the NT-3 mRNA at concentrations of 0.01, 0.1 
and 1microM. Orexin-A and B at 1microM led to an increase of twofold or more 
over the control. However, no such NT-s mRNA increase occurred with exposure to 
MCH at the same concentrations as orexins. The mRNA expression of BDNF was 
significantly increased only by orexin-B at 1microM. These findings suggest that 
orexins, but not MCH, may be an inducer of NT-3 in the cerebral cortex.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2008.11.028
PMID: 19026718 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Eur J Pharmacol. 2009 Jan 5;602(1):66-72. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2008.10.051.
 Epub 2008 Nov 6.

The MCH1 receptor antagonist SNAP 94847 induces sensitivity to dopamine D2/D3 
receptor agonists in rats and mice.

Marsteller DA(1), Gerald CP, Kong R, Cajina M, Craig DA, Swanson CJ.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
3615 Civic Center Boulevard, Abramson Building, Rm 918, Philadelphia, PA 19104, 
USA.

Antidepressant treatment of two or more weeks in rats has been shown to enhance 
the locomotor-stimulating effects of dopamine D(2)/D(3) receptor agonists. This 
action has been attributed to an increased sensitivity of postsynaptic dopamine 
receptors in the nucleus accumbens, thought to represent an essential mechanism 
by which antidepressants act therapeutically to enhance reward and motivation. 
We tested whether the melanin-concentrating hormone receptor(1) (MCH(1)) 
antagonist SNAP 94847, reported to have antidepressant-like activity in several 
preclinical behavioral models, mimics this key feature of established 
antidepressants. Locomotor responses to the dopamine D(2)/D(3) agonist 
quinpirole following acute or chronic administration of fluoxetine (18 
mg/kg/day) or SNAP 94847 (20 mg/kg/day) were assessed in habituated 
Sprague-Dawley rats, as well as BALB/c and CD-1 mice. Rats showed a significant 
increase in quinpirole-induced locomotor activity following chronic (2 weeks), 
but not acute (1 h) fluoxetine or SNAP 94847 administration. BALB/c mice treated 
for 21 days with fluoxetine or SNAP 94847 showed marked increases in 
quinpirole-induced locomotor activity, with the onset of hyper-locomotion 
appearing earlier in the time course after SNAP 94847 compared to fluoxetine. 
Administration of either compound for 7 days was also sufficient to augment the 
quinpirole response in BALB/c mice. Fluoxetine and SNAP 94847 (21 days) failed 
to modify quinpirole responses in CD-1 mice, and the compounds were ineffective 
after acute administration in both mouse strains. This report demonstrates in 
two rodent species that chronic treatment with an MCH(1) receptor antagonist, as 
with clinically proven antidepressants, produces sensitization to the locomotor 
effects of dopamine D(2)/D(3) agonists.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2008.10.051
PMID: 19027732 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2009 Mar;296(3):R469-75. doi: 
10.1152/ajpregu.90556.2008. Epub 2009 Jan 7.

Effects of intracerebroventricular and intra-accumbens melanin-concentrating 
hormone agonism on food intake and energy expenditure.

Guesdon B(1), Paradis E, Samson P, Richard D.

Author information:
(1)Centre de Recherche de l'Hôpital Laval et Centre de Recherche sur le 
Métabolisme Energétique de l'Université Laval, Québec, Canada.

The brain melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) system represents an anabolic 
system involved in energy balance regulation through influences exerted on the 
homeostatic and nonhomeostatic controls of food intake and energy expenditure. 
The present study was designed to further delineate the effect of the MCH system 
on energy balance regulation by assessing the actions of the MCH receptor 1 
(MCHR1) agonism on both food intake and energy expenditure after 
intracerebroventricular (third ventricle) and intra-nucleus-accumbens-shell 
(intraNAcSH) injections of a MCHR1 agonist. Total energy expenditure and 
substrate oxidation were assessed following injections in male Wistar rats using 
indirect calorimetry. Food intake was also measured. Pair-fed groups were added 
to evaluate changes in thermogenesis that would occur regardless of the meal 
size and its thermogenic response. Using such experimental conditions, we were 
able to demonstrate that acute MCH agonism in the brain, besides its orexigenic 
effect, induced a noticeable change in the utilization of the main metabolic 
fuels. In pair-fed animals, MCH significantly reduced lipid oxidation when it 
was injected in the third ventricle. Such an effect was not observed following 
the injection of MCH in the NAcSH, where MCH nonetheless strongly stimulated 
appetite. The present results further delineate the influence of MCH on energy 
expenditure and substrate oxidation while confirming the key role of the NAcSH 
in the effects of the MCH system on food intake.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpregu.90556.2008
PMID: 19129377 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Arzneimittelforschung. 2008;58(11):585-91. doi: 10.1055/s-0031-1296561.

New amide derivatives as melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 antagonists 
for the treatment of obesity.

Cirauqui N(1), Ceras J, Galiano S, Pérez-Silanes S, Juanenea L, Rivera G, Aldana 
I, Monge A.

Author information:
(1)Unidad de Investigación y Desarrollo de Medicamentos, Centro de Investigación 
en Farmacobiología Aplicada (CIFA), University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a recently discovered central nervous 
system (CNS) target for treating obesity. Two novel series of amide derivatives 
were synthesized and evaluated biologically as MCH-R1 (melanin-concentrating 
hormone receptor 1) antagonists. The results showed that diphenyl substituents 
on the amide lead to better activity than biphenyl substituents.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0031-1296561
PMID: 19137910 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


192. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2009 May;329(2):429-38. doi: 10.1124/jpet.108.143362.
Epub  2009 Jan 30.

Preclinical evaluation of melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 antagonism 
for the treatment of obesity and depression.

Gehlert DR(1), Rasmussen K, Shaw J, Li X, Ardayfio P, Craft L, Coskun T, Zhang 
HY, Chen Y, Witkin JM.

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience and Endocrine Discovery Research, Lilly Research Laboratories, 
Eli Lilly and Company, Lilly Corporate Center, Indianapolis, IN 46285, USA. 
gehlert_donald_r@lilly.com

The mammalian neuropeptide, melanin-concentrating hormone, interacts with two G 
protein-coupled receptors, melanin-concentrating hormone receptor (MCHR) 1 and 
MCHR2; however, only MCHR1 is expressed in rats and mice. In the present study, 
we evaluated MCHR1 antagonism in preclinical models believed to be predictive of 
antiobesity and antidepressant activity. Central activity of the selective MCHR1 
antagonist, GW803430 
[6-(4-chloro-phenyl)-3-[3-methoxy-4-(2-pyrrolidin-1-yl-ethoxy)-phenyl]-3H-thieno[3,2-d]pyrimidin-4-one], 
was evaluated using ex vivo binding with autoradiography. Effective doses of 
GW803430 (1 and 3 mg/kg p.o.) were correlated with antiobesity activity in a 
14-day study of diet-induced obese rats. GW803430 was evaluated subsequently for 
antidepressant-like effects in mice and rats. Acute and subchronic 
administration reduced immobility time in the mouse forced-swim test at doses of 
3 (acute) and 3 and 10 (chronic) mg/kg p.o., an effect that was absent in 
MCHR1(-/-) mice. Combined subeffective doses of GW803430 (0.3 and 1 mg/kg p.o.) 
and imipramine (5 mg/kg) produced a robust antidepressant-like response. The 
compound was also active in the tail suspension test at a dose of 10 mg/kg p.o. 
GW803430 (30 mg/kg p.o.) significantly reduced submissive behaviors at weeks 2 
and 3, a model of submissive behavior that may predict antidepressant onset. 
GW803430 decreased marble burying in mice at doses of 3, 10, and 30 mg/kg p.o., 
an assay that detects anxiolytic-like effects. Thus, GW803430 produces robust 
antiobesity and antidepressant-like effects in rats and mice at doses that 
compete for central MCHR1 in vivo. As such, MCHR1 should be considered as a 
promising target for future drug discovery efforts.

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.108.143362
PMID: 19182070 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Eur J Med Chem. 2009 Jun;44(6):2583-96. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2009.01.031.
Epub  2009 Feb 5.

Homology modeling of MCH1 receptor and validation by docking/scoring and 
protein-aligned CoMFA.

Abu-Hammad A(1), Zalloum WA, Zalloum H, Abu-Sheikha G, Taha MO.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of 
Jordan, Queen Rania St, Amman, Jordan.

Homology modeling is becoming a valid method for obtaining three-dimensional 
coordinates for proteins. However, it is hard to judge the qualities of the 
resulting models warranting robust subsequent validations. In an attempt to 
evaluate the quality of Melanin-concentrating hormone 1 receptor (MCH1R) 
homology models, a number of homology structures were scanned for potential 
binding cavities. Subsequently, a group of 35 benzylpiperidines' MCH1R 
inhibitors were docked into each of the proposed binding sites via four 
different scoring functions. The docked structures were utilized to construct 
corresponding protein-aligned comparative molecular field analysis (CoMFA) 
models by employing probe-based (H(+), OH, CH(3)) energy grids and genetic 
partial least squares (G/PLS) statistical analysis. The docking-based alignment 
succeeded in accessing self-consistent CoMFA models upon employing JAIN scoring 
function in one of the proposed binding pockets in a particular homology model. 
Furthermore, a ligand-based pharmacophore model was developed for the same set 
of inhibitors and was found to agree with the successful docking configuration. 
Therefore, we proved that the overall procedure of docking, scoring, and CoMFA 
evaluation can be a useful tool to validate homology models, which can be of 
value for structure-based design, in-silico screening, and in understanding the 
structural basis of ligand binding to MCH1R.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2009.01.031
PMID: 19250717 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Exp Dermatol. 2009 May;18(5):454-63. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0625.2008.00813.x.
Epub  2009 Mar 6.

Mapping of melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 B cell epitopes predicts two 
major binding sites for vitiligo patient autoantibodies.

Gavalas NG(1), Gottumukkala RV, Gawkrodger DJ, Watson PF, Weetman AP, Kemp EH.

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University of Sheffield, 
Sheffield, UK.

The melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1) has been identified as a B 
cell autoantigen in vitiligo with antibodies to the receptor detectable in 
binding and function-blocking assays. Two epitope domains (amino acids 1-138 and 
139-298) have been previously identified. In this study, we aimed to further 
define the epitope specificity of MCHR1 antibodies using phage-display 
technology and to identify the epitopes recognised by receptor antibodies 
detected in MCHR1 function-blocking assays. Antibody reactivity to MCHR1 
peptides 51-80, 85-98, 154-158 and 254-260 was identified by phage-display and 
subsequently confirmed in phage ELISA in 2/12, 5/12, 3/12 and 6/12 of vitiligo 
patients, respectively. The results suggest that major autoantibody epitopes are 
localised in the 85-98 and 254-260 amino acid regions of MCHR1 with minor 
epitopes in amino acid sequences 51-80 and 154-158. Antibodies with MCHR1 
function-blocking activity were determined to recognise epitope 254-260, this 
being the first epitope to be reported as a target site for antibodies that 
block the function of the receptor.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0625.2008.00813.x
PMID: 19320743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2009 Jul;205(1):129-40. doi: 
10.1007/s00213-009-1523-6. Epub 2009 Apr 2.

Effects of the MCH1 receptor antagonist SNAP 94847 on high-fat food-reinforced 
operant responding and reinstatement of food seeking in rats.

Nair SG(1), Adams-Deutsch T, Pickens CL, Smith DG, Shaham Y.

Author information:
(1)Behavioral Neuroscience Branch, NIDA/IRP/NIH/DHHS, 251 Bayview Blvd., Suite 
200, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

RATIONALE AND OBJECTIVES: The melanin-concentrating hormone 1 (MCH1) receptors 
play an important role in home-cage food consumption in rodents, but their role 
in operant high-fat food-reinforced responding or reinstatement of food seeking 
in animal models is unknown. Here, we used the MCH1 receptor antagonist SNAP 
94847 to explore these questions.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In experiment 1, we trained food-restricted rats (16 
g/day of nutritionally balanced rodent diet) to lever press for high-fat (35%) 
pellets (3-h/day, every other day) for 14 sessions. We then tested the effect of 
SNAP 94847 (3-30 mg/kg, intraperitoneal (i.p.)) on food-reinforced operant 
responding. In experiments 2 and 3, we trained rats to lever press for the food 
pellets (9 to 14 3-h sessions) and subsequently extinguished the food-reinforced 
lever responding by removing the food (10 to 17 sessions). We then tested the 
effect of SNAP 94847 on reinstatement of food seeking induced by MCH (20 microg, 
intracerebroventricular), noncontingent delivery of three pellets during the 
first minute of the test session (pellet-priming), contingent tone-light cues 
previously associated with pellet delivery (cue), or the pharmacological 
stressor yohimbine (2 mg/kg, i.p.).
RESULTS: Systemic injections of SNAP 94847 decreased food-reinforced operant 
responding and MCH-induced reinstatement of food seeking. SNAP 94847 had no 
effect on pellet-priming-, cue-, or yohimbine-induced reinstatement.
CONCLUSIONS: Results indicate that MCH1 receptors are involved in 
food-reinforced operant responding but not in reinstatement induced by acute 
exposure to high-fat food, food cues, or the stress-like state induced by 
yohimbine. These results suggest that different mechanisms mediate 
food-reinforced operant responding and reinstatement of food seeking.

DOI: 10.1007/s00213-009-1523-6
PMCID: PMC3143407
PMID: 19340414 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Apr 21;106(16):6772-7. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0811331106. Epub 2009 Apr 2.

The melanin-concentrating hormone system modulates cocaine reward.

Chung S(1), Hopf FW, Nagasaki H, Li CY, Belluzzi JD, Bonci A, Civelli O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of California, Irvine, CA 92697, USA.

Drug addiction is mediated by complex neuronal processes that converge on the 
shell of the nucleus accumbens (NAcSh). The NAcSh receives inputs from the 
lateral hypothalamus (LH), where self-stimulation can be induced. 
Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is produced mainly in the LH, and its 
receptor (MCH1R) is highly expressed in the NAcSh. We found that, in the NAcSh, 
MCH1R is coexpressed with dopamine receptors (D1R and D2R), and that MCH 
increases spike firing when both D1R and D2R are activated. Also, injecting MCH 
potentiates cocaine-induced hyperactivity in mice. Mice lacking MCH1R exhibit 
decreased cocaine-induced conditioned place preference, as well as cocaine 
sensitization. Using a specific MCH1R antagonist, we further show that acute 
blockade of the MCH system not only reduces cocaine self-administration, but 
also attenuates cue- and cocaine-induced reinstatement. Thus, the MCH system has 
an important modulatory role in cocaine reward and reinforcement by potentiating 
the dopaminergic system in the NAcSh, which may provide a new rationale for 
treating cocaine addiction.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0811331106
PMCID: PMC2672513
PMID: 19342492 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


197. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2009 May 15;19(10):2835-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2009.03.102. Epub 2009 Mar 26.

Identification and characterization of a selective radioligand for 
melanin-concentrating hormone 1-receptor (MCH1R).

Ito M(1), Sakamoto T, Suzuki T, Egashira S, Moriya M, Ishihara A, Iwaasa H, 
Matsushita H, Nakase K, Wallace MA, Dean D, Sato N, Tokita S, Kanatani A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Metabolic Disorder, Tsukuba Research Institute, BANYU 
Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd, Okubo, Ibaraki, Japan. masahiko_ito2@merck.com

We have developed and characterized [(35)S]4a as a potent and selective 
radioligand for melanin-concentrating hormone 1-receptor (MCH1R). Compound 
[(35)S]4a showed appreciable specific signals in brain slices prepared from 
wild-type mice but not from MCH1R deficient mice, confirming the specificity and 
utility of [(35)S]4a as a selective MCH1R radioligand for ex vivo receptor 
occupancy assays.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2009.03.102
PMID: 19361985 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Peptides. 2009 Nov;30(11):1990-6. doi: 10.1016/j.peptides.2009.04.010. Epub
2009  May 4.

Molecular cloning and expression of two melanin-concentrating hormone receptors 
in goldfish.

Mizusawa K(1), Saito Y, Wang Z, Kobayashi Y, Matsuda K, Takahashi A.

Author information:
(1)Kitasato University, Sanriku, Ofunato, Iwate, Japan. 
mizusawa@kitasato-u.ac.jp

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a neurohypophysial hormone and induces 
melanin aggregation in the skin in teleosts. MCH also has multiple roles in the 
central regulation of food intake in teleosts and mammals. MCH receptors (MCH-R) 
are among type I G-protein-coupled receptors. Here, we cloned two MCH receptors 
from goldfish, Carassius auratus. The amino acid sequence of goldfish MCH-R1 had 
57-88% homology with fish MCH-R1 and 49-50% homology with mammalian MCH-R1, 
while the amino acid sequence of goldfish MCH-R2 had 72-92% homology with fish 
MCH-R2 and 32% homology with human MCH-R2. Phylogenetic analysis showed that 
these two MCH-Rs are orthologous to the respective mammalian MCH-Rs. The common 
amino acid residues for ligand binding, signal transduction, and receptor 
conformation were well conserved in these receptors, although some intracellular 
basic-amino-acid-rich domains, which have been shown to exist in human MCH-R1 
and MCH-R2, were absent in goldfish MCH-R2. When stably expressed in HEK293 
cells, both goldfish MCH-R1 and MCH-R2 displayed a strong, dose-dependent, 
transient elevation of intracellular calcium in response to salmon MCH 
(EC(50)=0.8nM and 31.8nM, respectively). In contrast to goldfish MCH-R2, 
goldfish MCH-R1 signaling is not sensitive to pertussis toxin, suggesting an 
exclusive Galphaq coupling of goldfish MCH-R1 in the mammalian cell-based assay. 
Reverse transcriptase PCR revealed that both MCH-R1 and MCH-R2 mRNA are 
distributed in various tissues in goldfish. The various tissues including the 
brain and skin express both MCH-R1 and MCH-R2. These results suggest that these 
functional receptors mediate multiple effects of MCH in goldfish.

DOI: 10.1016/j.peptides.2009.04.010
PMID: 19397943 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Peptides. 2009 Nov;30(11):2008-13. doi: 10.1016/j.peptides.2009.04.009. Epub
 2009 May 4.

MCH receptor peptide agonists and antagonists.

MacNeil DJ(1), Bednarek MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Metabolic Disorders, Merck Research Laboratories, Rahway, NJ 
07065, USA. doug_macneil@merck.com

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is an important neuropeptide hormone 
involved in multiple physiological processes. Peptide derivatives of MCH have 
been developed as tools to aid research including potent radioligands, receptor 
selective agonists, and potent antagonists. These tools have been used to 
further understand the role of MCH in physiology, primarily in rodents. However, 
the tools could also help elucidate the role for MCHR1 and MCHR2 in mediating 
MCH signaling in higher species.

DOI: 10.1016/j.peptides.2009.04.009
PMID: 19397944 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2009 Jun 1;19(11):3072-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bmcl.2009.04.016.  Epub 2009 Apr 9.

Discovery of novel spiro-piperidine derivatives as highly potent and selective 
melanin-concentrating hormone 1 receptor antagonists.

Suzuki T(1), Moriya M, Sakamoto T, Suga T, Kishino H, Takahashi H, Ishikawa M, 
Nagai K, Imai Y, Sekino E, Ito M, Iwaasa H, Ishihara A, Tokita S, Kanatani A, 
Sato N, Fukami T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Tsukuba Research Institute, Merck Research 
Laboratories, Banyu Pharmaceutical Co, Ltd, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan. 
takao_suzuki@merck.com

Optimization of high-throughput screening hit 1a led to the identification of a 
novel spiro-piperidine class of melanin-concentrating hormone 1 receptor 
(MCH-1R) antagonists. Compound 3c was identified as a highly potent and 
selective MCH-1R antagonist, which has an IC(50) value of 0.09 nM at hMCH-1R. 
The synthesis and structure-activity relationships of the novel spiro-piperidine 
MCH-1R antagonists are described.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2009.04.016
PMID: 19403308 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Mol Neurosci. 2009 Sep;39(1-2):86-98. doi: 10.1007/s12031-009-9207-6. Epub
 2009 May 6.

The role of melanin-concentrating hormone in energy homeostasis and mood 
disorders.

Antal-Zimanyi I(1), Khawaja X.

Author information:
(1)Wyeth Research, CN 8000, Princeton, NJ 08540, USA. antali@wyeth.com

The melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a cyclic peptide exerting its actions 
through two G-protein-coupled receptors, MCHR1 and MCHR2. MCH is implicated in 
the regulation of different physiological functions, including energy 
homeostasis and mood that is supported by the distribution of MCH and MCHR1 in 
the hypothalamus as well as corticolimbic structures. Genetic manipulation of 
MCH and MCHR1 results in a lean phenotype with increased resting energy 
expenditure as well as anxiolytic and antidepressant phenotypes. Similar 
observations have been demonstrated pharmacologically using different classes of 
selective MCHR1 antagonists. Here, we summarize the reported genetic and 
pharmacological evidence for the role played by the MCH system in the regulation 
of both energy homeostasis and mood disorders. We also comment on the utility of 
small-molecule MCHR1 antagonists for the treatment of obesity and affective 
disorders compared to existing therapies and provide a critical overview of the 
potential risks.

DOI: 10.1007/s12031-009-9207-6
PMID: 19418262 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Peptides. 2009 May;30(5):974-81. doi: 10.1016/j.peptides.2009.01.017. Epub
2009  Jan 30.

Distinct roles of the DRY motif in rat melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 
in signaling control.

Aizaki Y(1), Maruyama K, Nakano-Tetsuka M, Saito Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Saitama Medical School of Medicine, Iruma-gun, 
Saitama, Japan.

Rhodopsin family (class A) G protein-coupled receptors possess common key 
residues or motifs that appear to be important for receptor function. To clarify 
the roles of the highly conserved amino acid triplet 
Asp(3.49)-Arg(3.50)-Tyr(3.51) (DRY motif), we examined how single-substitution 
mutations of the amino acids in the motif influenced specific features of rat 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCH1R) activity. Substitution of 
either Asp140(3.49) or Tyr142(3.51) to Ala resulted in nonfunctional receptors, 
despite the retention of apparent potencies for agonist binding. These 
loss-of-function phenotypes may be caused by the lack of stimulation for GDP-GTP 
exchange observed in GTPgammaS-binding assays. On the other hand, substitution 
of Arg141(3.50) to Ala caused a 4-fold reduction in the agonist binding affinity 
and, concomitantly, a rightward shift of the dose-dependency curve for calcium 
mobilization and inhibition of cyclic AMP production. Although many experimental 
studies have suggested that the DRY motif is involved in maintaining the 
receptor in its ground state, none of the DRY motif substitutions to Ala in 
MCH1R led to constitutive activation, in terms of the basal signaling level for 
ERK1/2 activation or GTPgammaS binding. These data suggest that the major 
contribution of the DRY motif in MCH1R is to govern receptor conformation and G 
protein coupling/recognition.

DOI: 10.1016/j.peptides.2009.01.017
PMID: 19428776 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Peptides. 2009 Nov;30(11):2071-5. doi: 10.1016/j.peptides.2009.04.025. Epub
2009  May 13.

Melanin-concentrating hormone and melanin-concentrating hormone receptors in 
mammalian skin physiopathology.

Kemp EH(1), Weetman AP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Metabolism, University of Sheffield, United Kingdom. 
e.h.kemp@sheffield.ac.uk

To date, there is a dearth of evidence to support functions for 
melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) and melanin-concentrating hormone receptors 
(MCH-R) in mammalian skin physiology including pigmentation, inflammation and 
immune responses and skin cell proliferation. Much research is therefore still 
needed to define the roles of the hormone and its receptors in mammalian skin. 
This will be a crucial step to identifying pathogenic mechanisms that may 
involve the MCH/MCH-R system in the context of inflammatory and autoimmune skin 
diseases as well as skin cancers. The following review summarizes the studies 
which have been carried out to examine the expression and function of MCH and 
MCH-R in mammalian skin. Recent findings with regard to humoral immune responses 
to the MCH-R1 in patients with the skin depigmenting disease vitiligo are also 
discussed.

DOI: 10.1016/j.peptides.2009.04.025
PMID: 19442695 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Peptides. 2009 Nov;30(11):2040-4. doi: 10.1016/j.peptides.2009.05.002. Epub
2009  May 15.

Animals models of MCH function and what they can tell us about its role in 
energy balance.

Pissios P(1).

Author information:
(1)Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA 02446, United States. 
ppissios@bidmc.harvard.edu

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) has attracted considerable attention because 
of its effects on food intake and body weight and the MCH receptor (MCHR1) 
remains one of the viable targets for obesity therapy. This review summarizes 
the literature examining the effects of MCH on body weight, food intake and 
energy expenditure in rodent models, and the central sites where MCH acts in 
regulating energy homeostasis. Emphasis is given on the discrepancies between 
the genetic and pharmacologic models of MCHR1 inactivation. We propose some 
solutions to resolve these discrepancies and discuss some future directions in 
MCH research.

DOI: 10.1016/j.peptides.2009.05.002
PMCID: PMC2977959
PMID: 19447150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2009 Jul 1;19(13):3568-72. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2009.04.147. Epub 2009 May 5.

Identification of 2-aminobenzimidazoles as potent melanin-concentrating hormone 
1-receptor (MCH1R) antagonists.

Moriya M(1), Kishino H, Sakuraba S, Sakamoto T, Suga T, Takahashi H, Suzuki T, 
Ito M, Ito J, Moriya R, Takenaga N, Iwaasa H, Ishihara A, Kanatani A, Fukami T.

Author information:
(1)Tsukuba Research Institute, Banyu Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd, Okubo-3, Tsukuba, 
Ibaraki 300-2611, Japan. minoru_moriya@merck.com

A series of 2-aminobenzimidazole-based MCH1R antagonists was identified by core 
replacement of the aminoquinoline lead 1. Subsequent modification of the 2- and 
5-positions led to improvement in potency and intrinsic clearance. Compound 25 
exhibited good plasma and brain exposure, and attenuated MCH induced food intake 
at 30mg/kg PO in rats.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2009.04.147
PMID: 19457661 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Am J Clin Nutr. 2009 Jul;90(1):225-33. doi: 10.3945/ajcn.2009.27709. Epub
2009  May 27.

Mortality in HIV infection is independently predicted by host iron status and 
SLC11A1 and HP genotypes, with new evidence of a gene-nutrient interaction.

McDermid JM(1), van der Loeff MF, Jaye A, Hennig BJ, Bates C, Todd J, Sirugo G, 
Hill AV, Whittle HC, Prentice AM.

Author information:
(1)Division of Nutritional Sciences, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA. 
jmm585@cornell.edu

BACKGROUND: Iron-related genes and iron status may independently contribute to 
variable HIV outcomes. The nature of the biologically plausible gene-nutrient 
interaction remains unknown.
OBJECTIVES: The objectives were to investigate whether iron-related genotypes 
and clinically abnormal iron status independently predict mortality in HIV and 
whether a gene-nutrient interaction exists.
DESIGN: Baseline plasma, DNA, and clinical data were obtained from 1362 
HIV-seropositive Gambian adults followed for 11.5 y to ascertain all-cause 
mortality. Iron status was estimated on the basis of plasma iron, soluble 
transferrin receptor (sTfR), ferritin, transferrin, transferrin index, and 
log(sTfR/ferritin). One haptoglobin (HP) and 5 SLC11A1 (NRAMP1) polymorphisms 
were genotyped.
RESULTS: SLC11A1-SLC3 and CAAA polymorphisms were the best independent genetic 
predictors of mortality [adjusted mortality rate ratio (95% CI)]: SLC3:G/C = 
0.59 (95% CI: 0.45, 0.85), CAAA:del/ins = 1.51 (95% CI: 1.10, 2.07). In an 
adjusted model that included all polymorphisms, SLC1:199/199, SLC1:other/other, 
SLC6a:A/A, and CAAA:del/ins were associated with significantly greater 
mortality, whereas Hp 2-1 and SLC3:G/C were protective. In unadjusted analyses, 
all biomarker concentrations were significantly associated with mortality. In an 
extension of previous findings, both low and elevated iron states were 
associated with mortality, but the nature of the risk was variable, with linear, 
inversely linear, and U-shaped associations depending on the biomarker. 
Mortality was significantly lower in HIV-2 than in HIV-1 infection in the 
presence of abnormal (low or elevated) iron status. A gene-iron interaction was 
detected (likelihood-ratio test P = 0.018); however, subject numbers restricted 
category-specific interpretation.
CONCLUSIONS: Iron-related genes, iron status, and their interaction predict 
mortality in HIV. These findings illustrate the complexity and uncertainty 
surrounding best practice for managing abnormal iron status and anemia during 
HIV infection and in regions with a high risk of infection.

DOI: 10.3945/ajcn.2009.27709
PMID: 19474129 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2009 Aug 1;19(15):4376-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bmcl.2009.05.075.  Epub 2009 May 27.

Ionic interactions for substituted MCH1R inhibitors studied by pK(a) values.

Lee JY(1), Lee H, Lim JY, Yoo SE, Kang NS.

Author information:
(1)Bio-Organic Science Division, Korea Research Institute of Chemical 
Technology, Daejon 305-600, Republic of Korea.

MCH1R inhibitors with the quinoline moiety having the aromatic amine and 
aliphatic amine chain were selected, and then the effect of substituents of the 
quinoline ring on the ionic interaction were studied by calculating pK(a) values 
for these amines at the B3LYP/6-311++G(d,p)//B3LYP/6-31+G(d) level in the gas 
phase and in water. For substituent with C, N, O, and S atoms next to the 
quinoline ring, respectively, the pK(a) values of aromatic amines are estimated 
to be 8.98, 12.19, 4.64, and 4.33 and those of the aliphatic amines are 12.65, 
10.82, 9.94, and 11.55, respectively.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2009.05.075
PMID: 19497742 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2009 Aug 1;19(15):4268-73. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2009.05.067. Epub 2009 May 24.

Optimization of 2-piperidin-4-yl-acetamides as melanin-concentrating hormone 
receptor 1 (MCH-R1) antagonists: Designing out hERG inhibition.

Berglund S(1), Egner BJ, Gradén H, Gradén J, Morgan DG, Inghardt T, Giordanetto 
F.

Author information:
(1)Medicinal Chemistry, AstraZeneca R&D Mölndal, Pepparedsleden 1, SE-431 83, 
Mölndal, Sweden.

Herein, we disclose the discovery and optimization of 2-piperidin-4-yl-acetamide 
derivatives as MCH-R1 antagonists. Structural investigation of 
piperidin-4-yl-amide and piperidin-4-yl-ureas identified 
2-piperidin-4-yl-acetamide-based MCH-R1 antagonists with outstanding in vivo 
efficacy but flawed with high affinity towards the hERG potassium channel. While 
existing hERG SAR information was employed to discover highly potent MCH-R1 
antagonists with minimized hERG inhibition, additional hurdles prevented their 
subsequent clinical exploration.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2009.05.067
PMID: 19500979 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2009 Aug 1;19(15):4274-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bmcl.2009.05.066.  Epub 2009 May 27.

Optimization of piperidin-4-yl-urea-containing melanin-concentrating hormone 
receptor 1 (MCH-R1) antagonists: Reducing hERG-associated liabilities.

Berglund S(1), Egner BJ, Gradén H, Gradén J, Morgan DG, Inghardt T, Giordanetto 
F.

Author information:
(1)Medicinal Chemistry, AstraZeneca R&D Mölndal, Pepparedsleden 1, SE-431 83, 
Mölndal, Sweden.

The discovery and optimization of piperidin-4-yl-urea derivatives as MCH-R1 
antagonists is herein described. Previous work around the piperidin-4-yl-amides 
led to the discovery of potent MCH-R1 antagonists. However, high affinity 
towards the hERG potassium channel proved to be an issue. Different strategies 
to increase hERG selectivity were implemented and resulted in the identification 
of piperidin-4-yl-urea compounds as potent MCH-R1 antagonists with minimized 
hERG inhibition.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2009.05.066
PMID: 19500982 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Schizophr Res. 2009 Sep;113(2-3):259-67. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2009.05.014.
Epub  2009 Jun 6.

Two complex genotypes relevant to the kynurenine pathway and melanotropin 
function show association with schizophrenia and bipolar disorder.

Miller CL(1), Murakami P, Ruczinski I, Ross RG, Sinkus M, Sullivan B, Leonard S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21227, USA. 
CMiller@Millerbio.com

Prior studies of mRNA expression, protein expression, and pathway metabolite 
levels have implicated dysregulation of the kynurenine pathway in the etiology 
of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. Here we investigate whether genes 
involved in kynurenine pathway regulation might interact with genes that respond 
to kynurenine metabolites, to enhance risk for these psychiatric phenotypes. 
Candidate genes were selected from prior studies of genetic association, gene 
expression profiling and animal models. A single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) 
in each of six genes, TDO2, HM74, HM74A, MCHR1, MCHR2 and MC5R, was tested for 
association with phenotype (475 Caucasians, 88 African Americans with 
schizophrenia; 97 Caucasians, 3 African Americans with bipolar disorder; 191 
Caucasian, 49 African American controls). An A allele in HM74 was significantly 
associated with schizophrenia and with schizophrenia plus bipolar disorder 
combined, odds ratios (OR) of 1.48, p=0.011 and 1.50, p=0.007, respectively. 
Augmentation of disease risk was found for the complex genotype 
HM74[A,any]+MCHR1[T,any]+MCHR2[C,any] which conferred an OR maximal for the 
combined diagnostic category of schizophrenia plus bipolar disorder (1.70, 
p=0.003), carried by 30% of the cases. TDO2[CC]+MC5R[G, any]+MCHR2[GC] conferred 
an OR maximal for schizophrenia alone (4.84, p=0.005), carried by 8% of 
schizophrenia cases. The combined risk posed by these related, complex genotypes 
is greater than any identified single locus and may derive from co-regulation of 
the kynurenine pathway by interacting genes, a lack of adequate 
melanotropin-controlled sequestration of the kynurenine-derived pigments, or the 
production of melanotropin receptor ligands through kynurenine metabolism.

DOI: 10.1016/j.schres.2009.05.014
PMCID: PMC2855687
PMID: 19502010 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Eur J Pharmacol. 2009 Aug 15;616(1-3):101-6. doi:
10.1016/j.ejphar.2009.06.009.  Epub 2009 Jun 18.

Localisation of melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 in rat brain and 
evidence that sleep parameters are not altered despite high central receptor 
occupancy.

Able SL(1), Ivarsson M, Fish RL, Clarke TL, McCourt C, Duckworth JM, Napier C, 
Katugampola SD.

Author information:
(1)Pfizer Global Research and Development, Sandwich, Kent, UK. 
sarah.able@pfizer.com

The present study describes the optimisation of an autoradiography assay that 
provides a means to measure the in vitro potency of melanin-concentrating 
hormone receptor 1 (MCH(1)) antagonists in native tissues and their ex vivo 
receptor occupancy. Initial localisation studies demonstrated that the MCH(1) 
receptor radioligand [(125)I]-S36057 bound to rat caudate putamen with specific 
binding of consistently >60%. In vitro, the MCH(1) receptor antagonists GW3430, 
SNAP-94847 and 4'-{[1-(cyclopropylmethyl)piperidin-4-ylidene] 
[5-fluoro-6-(trifluoromethyl)-1H-benzimidazol-2-yl]methyl}biphenyl-3-carbonitrile 
(referred to as Compound A) exhibited concentration dependent inhibition of the 
specific binding of [(125)I]-S36057, with a rank order of affinity of 
SNAP-94847>Compound A>GW3430. In an ex vivo occupancy assay, Compound A dosed 
orally to rats caused a concentration dependent inhibition of the specific 
binding of [(125)I]-S36057 to rat caudate putamen. The occupancy reached 
87+/-11% at 30 mg/kg and the estimated ED(50) was 9.3 mg/kg, which was 
equivalent to a free plasma concentration of 40 nM. As MCH has been reported to 
play a role in the regulation of the sleep cycle, the effect of Compound A on 
sleep parameters was investigated. However Compound A, at exposures that 
achieved near maximal receptor occupancy, failed to demonstrate any effects on 
the sleep/wake pattern in telemetered rats. We conclude that our ex vivo 
receptor occupancy assay is suitable for selecting centrally penetrant MCH(1) 
receptor antagonists and that, despite high levels of receptor occupancy, the 
selective MCH(1) receptor antagonist Compound A failed to elicit any changes in 
sleep electroencephalogram (EEG) parameters.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2009.06.009
PMID: 19540226 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Peptides. 2009 Nov;30(11):2014-24. doi: 10.1016/j.peptides.2009.06.015. Epub
 2009 Jun 21.

Melanin-concentrating hormone induces neurite outgrowth in human neuroblastoma 
SH-SY5Y cells through p53 and MAPKinase signaling pathways.

Cotta-Grand N(1), Rovère C, Guyon A, Cervantes A, Brau F, Nahon JL.

Author information:
(1)The Institut de Pharmacologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Centre National de 
la Recherche Scientifique and Université Nice-Sophia Antipolis, Valbonne, 
France.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) peptide plays a major role in energy 
homeostasis regulation. Little is known about cellular functions engaged by 
endogenous MCH receptor (MCH-R1). Here, MCH-R1 mRNA and cognate protein were 
found expressed in human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells. Electrophysiological 
experiments demonstrated that MCH modulated K(+) currents, an effect depending 
upon the time of cellular growth. MCH treatments induced a transient 
phosphorylation of MAPKinases, abolished by PD98059, and partially blocked by 
PTX, suggesting a Galphai/Galphao protein contribution. MCH stimulated 
expression and likely nuclear localization of phosphorylated p53 proteins, an 
effect fully dependent upon MAPKinase activities. MCH treatment also increased 
phosphorylation of Elk-1 and up-regulated Egr-1, two transcriptional factors 
targeted by the MAPKinase pathway. Finally, MCH provoked neurite outgrowth after 
24h-treatment of neuroblastoma cells. This effect and transcriptional factors 
activation were partly prevented by PD98059. Collectively, our results provide 
the first evidence for a role of MCH in neuronal differentiation of endogenously 
MCH-R1-expressing cells via non-exclusive MAPKinase and p53 signaling pathways.

DOI: 10.1016/j.peptides.2009.06.015
PMID: 19540893 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2009 Aug 15;19(16):4589-93. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2009.06.101. Epub 2009 Jul 4.

Discovery of imidazo[1,2-a]pyridines as potent MCH1R antagonists.

Kishino H(1), Moriya M, Sakuraba S, Sakamoto T, Takahashi H, Suzuki T, Moriya R, 
Ito M, Iwaasa H, Takenaga N, Ishihara A, Kanatani A, Sato N, Fukami T.

Author information:
(1)Tsukuba Research Institute, Merck Research Laboratories, Banyu Pharmaceutical 
Co, Ltd, Okubo 3, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 300-2611, Japan.

A series of imidazo[1,2-a]pyridine derivatives was identified and evaluated for 
MCH1R binding and antagonistic activity. Introduction of a methyl substituent at 
the 3-position of imidazo[1,2-a]pyridine provided compounds with a significant 
improvement in MCH1R affinity. Representative compounds in this series exhibited 
good potency and brain exposure in rats.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2009.06.101
PMID: 19615899 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2009 Sep 1;19(17):5186-90. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2009.07.023. Epub 2009 Jul 9.

Discovery of novel phenethylpyridone derivatives as potent melanin-concentrating 
hormone 1 receptor antagonists.

Ando M(1), Sekino E, Haga Y, Moriya M, Ito M, Ito J, Iwaasa H, Ishihara A, 
Kanatani A, Ohtake N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Tsukuba Research Institute, Merck Research 
Laboratories, Banyu Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd, Okubo-3, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan. 
andoumkt@gmail.com

Novel phenethylpyridone derivatives were identified as potent human 
melanin-concentrating hormone 1 receptor (MCH-1R) antagonists. A search for 
surrogates for the 4-(2-aminoethoxy)phenyl moiety of 1 resulted in discovery of 
2-[4-(aminomethyl)phenyl]ethyl substructure as in 6a. Successive optimization of 
the right-hand moiety led to the identification of a number of potent 
derivatives.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2009.07.023
PMID: 19632840 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2009 Sep 15;19(18):5339-45. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2009.07.132. Epub 2009 Aug 6.

Discovery of novel diarylketoxime derivatives as selective and orally active 
melanin-concentrating hormone 1 receptor antagonists.

Suzuki T(1), Kameda M, Ando M, Miyazoe H, Sekino E, Ito S, Masutani K, Kamijo K, 
Takezawa A, Moriya M, Ito M, Ito J, Nakase K, Matsushita H, Ishihara A, Takenaga 
N, Tokita S, Kanatani A, Sato N, Fukami T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Tsukuba Research Institute, Merck Research 
Laboratories, Banyu Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd, Okubo 3, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 300-2611, 
Japan. takao_suzuki@merck.com

Optimization of the lead 2a led to the identification of a novel diarylketoxime 
class of melanin-concentrating hormone 1 receptor (MCH-1R) antagonists. Our 
focus was directed toward improvement of hERG activity and metabolic stability. 
The representative derivative 4b showed potent and dose-dependent body weight 
reduction in diet-induced obese (DIO) C57BL/6J mice after oral administration. 
The synthesis and structure-activity relationships of the novel diarylketoxime 
MCH-1R antagonists are described.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2009.07.132
PMID: 19683441 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Curr Top Med Chem. 2009;9(6):504-38. doi: 10.2174/156802609788897826.

Promising strategies for obesity pharmacotherapy: melanocortin-4 (MC-4) receptor 
agonists and melanin concentrating hormone (MCH) receptor-1 antagonists.

Jeon MK(1), Cheon HG.

Author information:
(1)Center for Metabolic Syndrome Therapeutics, Korea Research Institute of 
Chemical Technology, Daejeon, Korea 305-343.

Despite remarkable progress in the elucidation of energy balance and regulation, 
the development of new anti-obesity drugs is still at the stage of infancy. 
Herein we briefly reviewed several investigational anti-obesity agents currently 
under development, consisting of agents controlling appetite, modulating 
nutrient absorption and lipid metabolism, sensing and regulating nutrient 
status, stimulating energy expenditure, and reducing adiposity. In particular, 
two promising targets such as melanocortin-4 (MC-4) receptor and melanin 
concentrating hormone (MCH)-1 receptor will be highlighted in this review 
covering major medicinal chemistry efforts and biological aspects of the 
compounds synthesized. Considering the enthusiastic efforts to develop 
efficacious and safe anti-obesity drugs, a range of novel medications treating 
obesity more effectively than is currently managed by pharmacotherapy will be 
available in near future.

DOI: 10.2174/156802609788897826
PMID: 19689363 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Curr Top Med Chem. 2009;9(6):539-53. doi: 10.2174/156802609788897871.

Computer-aided identification of ligands for GPCR anti-obesity targets.

Min KH(1), Yoo J, Park HJ.

Author information:
(1)College of Pharmacy, Chung-Ang University, Seoul 156-756, Korea.

Many orphan G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCR) have emerged as potential obesity 
targets. The authors are interested in the computer-aided discovery and 
development of small molecule anti-obesity agents targeting GPCR. Computational 
modeling studies have mainly been conducted on ghrelin receptor (GHS-R), 
melanocortin 4-receptor (MC4R), melanin-concentrating hormone 1 receptor (MCH1R) 
and cannabinoid 1 receptor (CB1R) in recent publications. Here, a homology 
modeling strategy for these receptors will be introduced, and the key structural 
features of their active and inactive conformations will be reviewed. In 
addition, the authors describe the uses of virtual screening methods to identify 
novel antagonists of MCH1R and CB1R, which provide valuable examples of the 
computer-aided design and structural optimization of GPCR ligands.

DOI: 10.2174/156802609788897871
PMID: 19689364 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2009 Nov 1;19(21):6166-71. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2009.09.003. Epub 2009 Sep 6.

Pyrimidine-based antagonists of h-MCH-R1 derived from ATC0175: in vitro 
profiling and in vivo evaluation.

Semple G(1), Tran TA, Kramer B, Hsu D, Han S, Choi J, Vallar P, Casper MD, Zou 
N, Hauser EK, Thomsen W, Whelan K, Sengupta D, Morgan M, Sekiguchi Y, Kanuma K, 
Chaki S, Grottick AJ.

Author information:
(1)Medicinal Chemistry, Arena Pharmaceuticals, 6166 Nancy Ridge Drive, San 
Diego, CA 92121, USA. gsemple@arenapharm.com

A series of pyrimidine analogues derived from ATC0175 were potent antagonists of 
human MCH-R1 in vitro. Significantly improved receptor selectivity was achieved 
with several analogues from this series, but no improvement in brain 
partitioning was noted. One example from this series was shown to inhibit food 
intake and decrease body weight in a chronic study. However no clear correlation 
between the pharmacodynamic effect and the pharmacokinetic data with respect to 
brain concentration was discernible leading us to conclude that the observed 
effect was most likely not due to interaction with the MCH-R1.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2009.09.003
PMID: 19773162 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Behav Brain Res. 2010 Feb 11;207(1):14-20. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2009.09.032.
Epub  2009 Sep 27.

Additive effects of olanzapine and melanin-concentrating hormone agonism on 
energy balance.

Guesdon B(1), Denis RG, Richard D.

Author information:
(1)Centre de recherche de l'Institut de cardiologie et de pneumologie de Québec 
(Hôpital Laval) et Centre de recherche sur le métabolisme énergétique de 
l'Université Laval, 2725 chemin Sainte-Foy, Québec, Canada.

Atypical antipsychotic drugs (AAPDs) induce hyperphagia and body weight gain as 
a deleterious side effect. However, the mechanism whereby these drugs affect the 
neuronal pathways regulating energy balance has yet to be fully elucidated. The 
present study was conducted to investigate the respective and interaction 
effects of olanzapine and agonism of the melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) 
receptor (MCHR1) on body weight, food intake, adiposity and expressions of genes 
liable of being involved in the anabolic action of AAPDs and MCH agonism. MCH is 
a hypothalamic neuropeptide, which exerts stimulating effects on food intake and 
body weight gain. Male Wistar rats received olanzapine (1 mg/kg of rat/day per 
os) and/or an intracerebroventricular (ICV) infusion of a MCHR1 agonist (30 
microg/rat/day) during 13 days. Food intake and body weight were recorded daily, 
whereas adipose tissue depots were weighed at day 13. At the end of the 
experiment, we also measured brain levels of the messengers RNAs (mRNAs) 
encoding for MCH, MCHR1, neuropeptides-Y (NPY) and agouti-related peptide (AgRP) 
using in situ hybridization. The 13-day treatments combining olanzapine and the 
MCHR1 agonist exerted additive effects in enhancing food intake and adiposity. 
Consistently, each treatment differently affected brain expression of genes 
influencing energy balance. While the MCHR1 agonist treatment increased NPY mRNA 
expression in the hypothalamic arcuate nucleus, olanzapine treatment 
specifically increased MCHR1 mRNA expression in the nucleus accumbens shell 
(NAcSh). AAPDs and MCH agonism exert additive effects on energy balance and 
selective effects on the brain expression of energy balance-related genes.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2009.09.032
PMID: 19788900 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Oct 6;106(40):17217-22. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0908200106. Epub 2009 Sep 21.

Melanin-concentrating hormone directly inhibits GnRH neurons and blocks 
kisspeptin activation, linking energy balance to reproduction.

Wu M(1), Dumalska I, Morozova E, van den Pol A, Alreja M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine and the Ribicoff 
Research Facilities, Connecticut Mental Health Center, New Haven, CT 06508, USA.

A link between energy balance and reproduction is critical for the survival of 
all species. Energy-consuming reproductive processes need to be aborted in the 
face of a negative energy balance, yet knowledge of the pathways mediating this 
link remains limited. Fasting and food restriction that inhibit fertility also 
upregulate the hypothalamic melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) system that 
promotes feeding and decreases energy expenditure; MCH knockout mice are lean 
and have a higher metabolism but remain fertile. MCH also modulates sleep, drug 
abuse behavior, and mood, and MCH receptor antagonists are currently being 
developed as antiobesity and antidepressant drugs. Despite the clinical 
implications of MCH, the direct postsynaptic effects of MCH have never been 
reported in CNS neurons. Using patch-clamp recordings in brain slices from 
multiple lines of transgenic GFP mice, we demonstrate a strong inhibitory effect 
of MCH on an exclusive population of septal vGluT2-GnRH neurons that is 
activated by the puberty-triggering and preovulatory luteinizing hormone 
surge-mediating peptide, kisspeptin. MCH has no effect on kisspeptin-insensitive 
GnRH, vGluT2, cholinergic, or GABAergic neurons located within the same nucleus. 
The inhibitory effects of MCH are reproducible and nondesensitizing and are 
mediated via a direct postsynaptic Ba(2+)-sensitive K(+) channel mechanism 
involving the MCHR1 receptor. MCH immunoreactive fibers are in close proximity 
to vGluT2-GFP and GnRH-GFP neurons. Importantly, MCH blocks the excitatory 
effect of kisspeptin on vGluT2-GnRH neurons. Considering the role of MCH in 
regulating energy balance and of GnRH and kisspeptin in triggering puberty and 
maintaining fertility, MCH may provide a critical link between energy balance 
and reproduction directly at the level of the kisspeptin-activated vGluT2-GnRH 
neuron.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0908200106
PMCID: PMC2761345
PMID: 19805188 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


221. Br J Pharmacol. 2010 Jan 1;159(2):374-83. doi:
10.1111/j.1476-5381.2009.00536.x.  Epub 2009 Dec 10.

Mechanism of the anti-obesity effects induced by a novel melanin-concentrating 
hormone 1-receptor antagonist in mice.

Ito M(1), Ishihara A, Gomori A, Matsushita H, Ito M, Metzger JM, Marsh DJ, Haga 
Y, Iwaasa H, Tokita S, Takenaga N, Sato N, MacNeil DJ, Moriya M, Kanatani A.

Author information:
(1)Tsukuba Research Institute, Banyu Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Tsukuba, Japan.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is an orexigenic 
neuropeptide expressed in the lateral hypothalamus that is involved in feeding 
and body weight regulation. Intracerebroventricular infusion of a peptidic MCH1 
receptor antagonist ameliorated obesity in murine models. Recently, small 
molecule MCH1 receptor antagonists have been developed and characterized for the 
treatment of obesity. However, little is known of the mechanism of the 
anti-obesity effects of MCH1 receptor antagonists.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: To examine the mechanisms of action of the anti-obesity 
effect of MCH1 receptor antagonists more precisely, we conducted a pair-feeding 
study in mice with diet-induced obesity (DIO), chronically treated with an 
orally active and highly selective MCH1 receptor antagonist and examined changes 
in mRNA expression levels in liver, brown and white adipose tissues. We also 
assessed the acute effects of the MCH1 receptor antagonist in energy expenditure 
under thermoneutral conditions.
KEY RESULTS: Treatment with the MCH1 receptor antagonist at 30 mg.kg(-1) for 1 
month moderately suppressed feeding and significantly reduced body weight by 
24%. In contrast, pair-feeding resulted in a smaller weight reduction of 10%. 
Treatment with the MCH1 receptor antagonist resulted in a higher body 
temperature compared with the pair-fed group. TaqMan and calorimetry data 
suggested that the MCH1 receptor antagonist also stimulated thermogenesis.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: Our results indicate that an MCH1 receptor 
antagonist caused anti-obesity effects im mice by acting on both energy intake 
and energy expenditure.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2009.00536.x
PMCID: PMC2825359
PMID: 20015294 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Obes Facts. 2008;1(3):138-45. doi: 10.1159/000137665. Epub 2008 Jun 20.

Genotype-phenotype associations in obesity dependent on definition of the 
obesity phenotype.

Kring SI(1), Larsen LH, Holst C, Toubro S, Hansen T, Astrup A, Pedersen O, 
Sørensen TI.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Preventive Medicine, Copenhagen University Hospital, Centre for 
Health and Society, Copenhagen, Denmark. SI@ipm.regionh.dk

OBJECTIVE: In previous studies of associations of variants in the genes UCP2, 
UCP3, PPARG2, CART, GRL, MC4R, MKKS, SHP, GHRL, and MCHR1 with obesity, we have 
used a case-control approach with cases defined by a threshold for BMI. In the 
present study, we assess the association of seven abdominal, peripheral, and 
overall obesity phenotypes, which were analyzed quantitatively, and thirteen 
candidate gene polymorphisms in these ten genes in the same cohort.
METHODS: Obese Caucasian men (n = 234, BMI >or= 31.0 kg/m(2)) and a randomly 
sampled non-obese group (n = 323), originally identified at the draft board 
examinations, were re-examined at median ages of 47.0 or 49.0 years by 
anthropometry and DEXA scanning. Obesity phenotypes included BMI, fat body mass 
index, waist circumference, waist for given BMI, intra-abdominal adipose tissue, 
hip circumference and lower body fat mass (%). Using logistic regression models, 
we estimated the odds for defined genotypes (dominant or recessive genetic 
transmission) in relation to z-scores of the phenotypes.
RESULTS: The minor (rare) allele for SHP 512G>C (rs6659176) was associated with 
increased hip circumference. The minor allele for UCP2 Ins45bp was associated 
with increased BMI, increased abdominal obesity, and increased hip 
circumference. The minor allele for UCP2 -866G>A (rs6593669) was associated with 
borderline increased fat body mass index. The minor allele for MCHR1 100213G>A 
(rs133072) was associated with reduced abdominal obesity. None of the other 
genotype-phenotype combinations showed appreciable associations.
CONCLUSION: If replicated in independent studies with focus on the specific 
phenotypes, our explorative studies suggest significant associations between 
some candidate gene polymorphisms and distinct obesity phenotypes, predicting 
beneficial and detrimental effects, depending on compartments for body fat 
accumulation.

Copyright 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000137665
PMCID: PMC6452144
PMID: 20054173 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


223. J Mol Neurosci. 2010 Nov;42(3):459-63. doi: 10.1007/s12031-010-9358-5. Epub
2010  Apr 22.

Acute homeostatic responses to increased fat consumption in MCH1R knockout mice.

Chung S(1), Wong T, Nagasaki H, Civelli O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of California, 369 Med Surge II, 
Irvine, CA 92612, USA.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a hypothalamic neuropeptide which has 
been shown to regulate energy homeostasis. Using genetic knockout mice lacking 
the MCH1 receptor (MCH1R), we investigated how these mice adapt to metabolic 
changes caused by excessive caloric consumption. We show that the MCH system is 
one of the players mediating behavioral and metabolic responses upon increased 
caloric consumption. MCH1R knockout mice showed decreased tendency of food 
intake upon exposure to a high-fat diet. They also are resistant to gain weight 
upon high-fat diet by increasing fat metabolism. Therefore, the MCH system is 
important in regulating metabolic responses upon various environmental stimuli 
such as high-fat diet.

DOI: 10.1007/s12031-010-9358-5
PMCID: PMC2955453
PMID: 20411353 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2010 Jul;299(1):G63-9. doi: 
10.1152/ajpgi.00059.2010. Epub 2010 Apr 29.

Expression of cannabinoid CB1 receptors by vagal afferent neurons: kinetics and 
role in influencing neurochemical phenotype.

Burdyga G(1), Varro A, Dimaline R, Thompson DG, Dockray GJ.

Author information:
(1)Physiological Laboratory, School of Biomedical Sciences, Univ. of Liverpool, 
Liverpool, L69 3BX, UK.

The intestinal hormone cholecystokinin (CCK) inhibits food intake via 
stimulation of vagal afferent neurons (VAN). Recent studies suggest that CCK 
also regulates the expression of some G protein-coupled receptors and 
neuropeptide transmitters in these neurons. The aim of the present study was to 
characterize the expression of cannabinoid (CB)1 receptors in VAN and to 
determine whether stimulation of these receptors plays a role in regulating 
neurochemical phenotype. Expression of CB1 in rat VAN was detectable by in situ 
hybridization or immunohistochemistry after 6 h of fasting and increased to a 
maximum after 24 h when approximately 50% of neurons in the mid and caudal 
regions expressed the receptor. Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH)1 receptors 
also increased with fasting, but the changes were delayed compared with CB1; in 
contrast Y2 receptors (Y2R) exhibited reciprocal changes in expression to CB1. 
Administration of CCK8s (10 nmol ip) to fasted rats decreased expression of CB1 
with a t(1/2) of approximately 1 h compared with 3 h for MCH1. The action of 
CCK8s was inhibited by ghrelin and orexin-A. The CB1 agonist anandamide 
(intraperitoneally) reversed the effect of CCK8s on CB1, MCH1, and Y2 receptor 
expression. In contrast, in rats fasted for 18 h, administration of a CB1 
antagonist/inverse agonist (AM281 ip) downregulated CB1 expression and increased 
Y2 receptor expression. Activation of vagal CB1 receptors therefore influences 
the neurochemical phenotype of these neurons, indicating a new and hitherto 
unrecognized role for endocannabinoids in gut-brain signaling.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpgi.00059.2010
PMCID: PMC2904113
PMID: 20430875 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


225. J Neurosci. 2010 Jun 16;30(24):8263-73. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5858-09.2010.

Regulation of nucleus accumbens activity by the hypothalamic neuropeptide 
melanin-concentrating hormone.

Sears RM(1), Liu RJ, Narayanan NS, Sharf R, Yeckel MF, Laubach M, Aghajanian GK, 
DiLeone RJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Ribicoff Research Facilities, Yale University 
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06508, USA.

The lateral hypothalamus and the nucleus accumbens shell (AcbSh) are brain 
regions important for food intake. The AcbSh contains high levels of receptor 
for melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH), a lateral hypothalamic peptide critical 
for feeding and metabolism. MCH receptor (MCHR1) activation in the AcbSh 
increases food intake, while AcbSh MCHR1 blockade reduces feeding. Here 
biochemical and cellular mechanisms of MCH action in the rodent AcbSh are 
described. A reduction of phosphorylation of GluR1 at serine 845 (pSer(845)) is 
shown to occur after both pharmacological and genetic manipulations of MCHR1 
activity. These changes depend upon signaling through G(i/o), and result in 
decreased surface expression of GluR1-containing AMPA receptors (AMPARs). 
Electrophysiological analysis of medium spiny neurons (MSNs) in the AcbSh 
revealed decreased amplitude of AMPAR-mediated synaptic events (mEPSCs) with MCH 
treatment. In addition, MCH suppressed action potential firing MSNs through K(+) 
channel activation. Finally, in vivo recordings confirmed that MCH reduces 
neuronal cell firing in the AcbSh in freely moving animals. The ability of MCH 
to reduce cell firing in the AcbSh is consistent with a general model from other 
pharmacological and electrophysiological studies whereby reduced AcbSh neuronal 
firing leads to food intake. The current work integrates the hypothalamus into 
this model, providing biochemical and cellular mechanisms whereby metabolic and 
limbic signals converge to regulate food intake.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5858-09.2010
PMCID: PMC2907886
PMID: 20554878 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


226. J Mol Neurosci. 2011 Jan;43(1):115-21. doi: 10.1007/s12031-010-9411-4. Epub
2010  Jun 26.

Recent updates on the melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) and its receptor 
system: lessons from MCH1R antagonists.

Chung S(1), Parks GS, Lee C, Civelli O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of California, 369 Med Surge II, 
Irvine, CA 92612, USA.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a 19-amino-acid cyclic peptide which was 
originally found to lighten skin color in fish that is highly conserved among 
many species. MCH interacts with two G-protein-coupled receptors, MCH1R and 
MCH2R, but only MCH1R is expressed in rodents. MCH is mainly synthesized in the 
lateral hypothalamus and zona incerta, while MCH1R is widely expressed 
throughout the brain. Thus, MCH signaling is implicated in the regulation of 
many physiological functions. The identification of MCH1R has led to the 
development of small-molecule MCH1R antagonists that can block MCH signaling. 
MCH1R antagonists are useful not only for their potential therapeutic value, but 
also for understanding the physiological functions of the endogenous MCH system. 
Here, we review the physiological functions of the MCH system which have been 
investigated using MCH1R antagonists such as food intake, anxiety, depression, 
reward, and sleep. This will help us understand the physiological functions of 
the MCH system and suggest some of the potential applications of MCH1R 
antagonists in human disorders.

DOI: 10.1007/s12031-010-9411-4
PMCID: PMC3018593
PMID: 20582487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


227. J Neurophysiol. 2010 Sep;104(3):1417-25. doi: 10.1152/jn.01052.2009. Epub
2010  Jun 30.

Major impairments of glutamatergic transmission and long-term synaptic 
plasticity in the hippocampus of mice lacking the melanin-concentrating hormone 
receptor-1.

Pachoud B(1), Adamantidis A, Ravassard P, Luppi PH, Grisar T, Lakaye B, Salin 
PA.

Author information:
(1)Unité Mixte de Recherche 5167 du Centre National de la Recherche 
Scientifique, Institut Fédératif des Neurosciences de Lyon (IFR19), Université 
Claude, Lyon, France.

The hypothalamic neuropeptide melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) plays 
important roles in energy homeostasis, anxiety, and sleep regulation. Since the 
MCH receptor-1 (MCH-R1), the only functional receptor that mediates MCH 
functions in rodents, facilitates behavioral performance in 
hippocampus-dependent learning tasks, we investigated whether glutamatergic 
transmission in CA1 pyramidal cells could be modulated in mice lacking the 
MCH-R1 gene (MCH-R1(-/-)). We found that both 
α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) and 
N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor-mediated transmissions were diminished in 
the mutant mice compared with their controls. This deficit was explained, at 
least in part, by a postsynaptic down-regulation of these receptors since the 
amplitude of miniature excitatory postsynaptic currents and the NMDA/AMPA ratio 
were decreased. Long-term synaptic potentiation (LTP) was also impaired in 
MCH-R1(-/-) mice. This was due to an altered induction, rather than an impaired, 
expression because repeating the induction stimulus restored LTP to a normal 
magnitude. In addition, long-term synaptic depression was strongly diminished in 
MCH-R1(-/-) mice. These results suggest that MCH exerts a facilitatory effect on 
CA1 glutamatergic synaptic transmission and long-term synaptic plasticity. 
Recently, it has been shown that MCH neurons fire exclusively during sleep and 
mainly during rapid eye movement sleep. Thus these findings provide a mechanism 
by which sleep might facilitate memory consolidation.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.01052.2009
PMCID: PMC4073994
PMID: 20592115 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2010 Sep;211(4):367-75. doi: 
10.1007/s00213-010-1891-y. Epub 2010 Jul 14.

Suppression of alcohol self-administration and reinstatement of alcohol seeking 
by melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCH1-R) antagonism in Wistar rats.

Cippitelli A(1), Karlsson C, Shaw JL, Thorsell A, Gehlert DR, Heilig M.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Clinical and Translational Studies, National Institute of 
Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA), National Institutes of Health (NIH), 10 
Center Dr., 1/5330, Bethesda, MD 20892-1108, USA.

RATIONALE: Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is involved in regulation of 
appetitive behaviors as well as emotional reactivity and reward, behavioral 
domains relevant to alcohol addiction.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We evaluated the effects of the non-peptide MCH1 receptor 
antagonist, GW803430 
[6-(4-chloro-phenyl)-3-[3-methoxy-4-(2-pyrrolidin-1-yl-ethoxy)-phenyl]-3H-thieno[3,2-d]pyrimidin-4-one; 
3-30 mg/kg, i.p.] on alcohol-related behaviors in Wistar rats.
RESULTS: Ex vivo binding experiments demonstrated that the GW803430 dose range 
used resulted in high central MCH1 receptor occupancy. Alcohol 
self-administration was dose-dependently and potently suppressed, by 
approximately 80% at the highest dose. Reinstatement of alcohol-seeking induced 
by alcohol-associated cues was essentially eliminated. In contrast, 
reinstatement induced by footshock stress was not significantly altered. Taste 
preference for a quinine/saccharin solution, locomotor activity, and alcohol 
elimination were unaffected.
CONCLUSION: Together, these observations support a specific involvement of the 
MCH system in mediating alcohol reward and cue-induced relapse to alcohol 
seeking. MCH1-R antagonism may constitute an attractive treatment target for 
alcohol use disorders.

DOI: 10.1007/s00213-010-1891-y
PMID: 20628734 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2010 Jul;1200:112-9. doi:
10.1111/j.1749-6632.2010.05507.x.

Functional interaction of regulator of G protein signaling-2 with 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1.

Miyamoto-Matsubara M(1), Chung S, Saito Y.

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Integrated Arts and Sciences, Hiroshima University, 
Hiroshima, Japan.

Melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1) is a G protein-coupled receptor 
(GPCR) highly expressed in the central nervous system. MCHR1 mediates many 
physiological functions including energy homeostasis and emotional processing. 
By acting as GTPase-activating proteins, regulators of G protein-signaling (RGS) 
proteins are negative modulators of GPCRs. We previously elucidated that RGS8 of 
the B/R4 RGS subfamily potently inhibits the action of both Galphaq- and 
Galphai/o-dependent MCHR1 signaling. In the present study of living cells, we 
provide evidence that another B/R4 protein, RGS2, is an efficient regulator of 
MCHR1-mediated calcium signaling exclusively via the Galphaq-dependent pathway. 
This effect was not observed for RGS4 and RGS5 proteins. Cotransfection of RGS2 
with RGS8 additively increased the potency for inhibition of MCHR1 signaling. 
Truncation experiments revealed that an internal sequence within the N-terminal 
region of RGS2 (amino acids 28-80) was involved in the RGS2 modulation of MCHR1 
activity. Our data suggest that RGS2 and RGS8 differentially associate with 
MCHR1 and may represent two distinct modes of signaling mechanisms in vivo.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2010.05507.x
PMID: 20633139 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


230. J Mol Neurosci. 2011 Feb;43(2):132-7. doi: 10.1007/s12031-010-9425-y. Epub
2010  Jul 16.

Anxiolytic effects of the MCH1R antagonist TPI 1361-17.

Lee C(1), Parks GS, Civelli O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of California Irvine, 369 Med Surge 
II, Irvine, CA 92697, USA.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a hypothalamic neuropeptide that acts on 
the MCH1 receptor. MCH1R is expressed widely throughout the brain, particularly 
in regions thought to be involved in the regulation of stress and emotional 
response. The role of MCH in anxiety has been controversial, however. Central 
administration of MCH has been reported to promote or reduce anxiety-like 
behaviors. The anxiolytic activity of several MCH1R antagonists has also been 
debated. To address this issue, we have tested whether TPI 1361-17, a highly 
specific and high affinity MCH1R antagonist, exerts anxiolytic effects in two 
commonly used models of anxiety, the elevated plus maze and the light-dark 
transition test. We show that this MCH1R antagonist exerts potent anxiolytic 
effects in both assays. Our study therefore supports previous studies indicating 
that MCH1R antagonists may be useful in the treatment of anxiety.

DOI: 10.1007/s12031-010-9425-y
PMCID: PMC3026772
PMID: 20635163 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


231. J Med Chem. 2010 Aug 12;53(15):5576-86. doi: 10.1021/jm1002777.

Biological diversity from a structurally diverse library: systematically 
scanning conformational space using a pyranose scaffold.

Abbenante G(1), Becker B, Blanc S, Clark C, Condie G, Fraser G, Grathwohl M, 
Halliday J, Henderson S, Lam A, Liu L, Mann M, Muldoon C, Pearson A, Premraj R, 
Ramsdale T, Rossetti T, Schafer K, Le Thanh G, Tometzki G, Vari F, Verquin G, 
Waanders J, West M, Wimmer N, Yau A, Zuegg J, Meutermans W.

Author information:
(1)Alchemia Ltd, Eight Mile Plains, Queensland 4113, Australia.

Success in discovering bioactive peptide mimetics is often limited by the 
difficulties in correctly transposing known binding elements of the active 
peptide onto a small and metabolically more stable scaffold while maintaining 
bioactivity. Here we describe a scanning approach using a library of 
pyranose-based peptidomimetics that is structurally diverse in a systematic 
manner, designed to cover all possible conformations of tripeptide motifs 
containing two aromatic groups and one positive charge. Structural diversity was 
achieved by efficient selection of various chemoforms, characterized by a choice 
of pyranose scaffold of defined chirality and substitution pattern. A systematic 
scanning library of 490 compounds was thus designed, produced, and screened in 
vitro for activity at the somatostatin (sst(1-5)) and melanin-concentrating 
hormone (MCH(1)) receptors. Bioactive compounds were found for each target, with 
specific chemoform preferences identified in each case, which can be used to 
guide follow-on drug discovery projects without the need for scaffold hopping.

DOI: 10.1021/jm1002777
PMID: 20684600 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Eur J Med Chem. 2010 Oct;45(10):4509-22. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2010.07.011.
Epub  2010 Jul 16.

Three-dimensional quantitative structure-activity relationship CoMSIA/CoMFA and 
LeapFrog studies on novel series of bicyclo [4.1.0] heptanes derivatives as 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptor R1 antagonists.

Morales-Bayuelo A(1), Ayazo H, Vivas-Reyes R.

Author information:
(1)Grupo de Química Cuántica y Teórica, Universidad de Cartagena, Programa de 
Química, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, Cartagena, Colombia.

Comparative molecular similarity indices analysis (CoMSIA) and comparative 
molecular field analysis (CoMFA) were performed on a series of bicyclo [4.1.0] 
heptanes derivatives as melanin-concentrating hormone receptor R1 antagonists 
(MCHR1 antagonists). Molecular superimposition of antagonists on the template 
structure was performed by database alignment method. The statistically 
significant model was established on sixty five molecules, which were validated 
by a test set of ten molecules. The CoMSIA model yielded the best predictive 
model with a q(2) = 0.639, non cross-validated R(2) of 0.953, F value of 92.802, 
bootstrapped R(2) of 0.971, standard error of prediction = 0.402, and standard 
error of estimate = 0.146 while the CoMFA model yielded a q(2) = 0.680, non 
cross-validated R(2) of 0.922, F value of 114.351, bootstrapped R(2) of 0.925, 
standard error of prediction = 0.364, and standard error of estimate = 0.180. 
CoMFA analysis maps were employed for generating a pseudo cavity for LeapFrog 
calculation. The contour maps obtained from 3D-QSAR studies were appraised for 
activity trends for the molecules analyzed. The results show the variability of 
steric and electrostatic contributions that determine the activity of the MCHR1 
antagonist, with these results we proposed new antagonists that may be more 
potent than previously reported, these novel antagonists were designed from the 
addition of highly electronegative groups in the substituent di(i-C(3)H(7))N- of 
the bicycle [4.1.0] heptanes, using the model CoMFA which also was used for the 
molecular design using the technique LeapFrog. The data generated from the 
present study will further help to design novel, potent, and selective MCHR1 
antagonists.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2010.07.011
PMID: 20691511 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Neurosci Lett. 2010 Oct 29;484(2):104-7. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2010.08.018.
Epub  2010 Aug 13.

Mice lacking Melanin Concentrating Hormone 1 receptor are resistant to seizures.

Parks GS(1), Okumura SM, Gohil K, Civelli O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental and Cell Biology, University of California, 
Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA.

The Melanin Concentrating Hormone (MCH) system is widely expressed throughout 
the central nervous system and regulates a variety of physiological functions. 
It has been reported that acute central administration of MCH inhibits 
pentylenetetrazol (PTZ)-induced seizures in rats. In the present study MCH(1) 
receptor knockout mice (MCH(1)R-KO) were used to investigate the role of MCH 
signaling in modulating seizure susceptibility. Seizure behaviors were compared 
between MCH(1)R-KO and wild type (MCH(1)R-WT) mice following administration of 
the convulsant compounds PTZ or pilocarpine. PTZ injection induced clonic 
seizures in MCH(1)R-WT mice but failed to induce them in MCH(1)R-KO mice. More 
than twice as many injections of intermittently administered low dose PTZ were 
required to induce clonic seizures in MCH(1)R-KO mice than in MCH(1)R-WT mice. 
Following pilocarpine injection, MCH(1)R-WT mice experienced clonic seizures and 
most had tonic seizures and entered status epilepticus, while all MCH(1)R-KO 
mice were completely resistant to these effects. MCH(1)R-KO mice were also 
observed to be strongly protected from the development of PTZ kindling. Genetic 
deletion of MCH(1)R conferred resistance to all seizure models tested in this 
study. The data indicate that the MCH system is involved in the regulation of 
PTZ and pilocarpine seizure threshold.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2010.08.018
PMCID: PMC2943056
PMID: 20709149 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2010 Sep 15;20(18):5443-8. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2010.07.086. Epub 2010 Jul 29.

Discovery of novel, orally available benzimidazoles as melanin concentrating 
hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1) antagonists.

Sasmal PK(1), Sasmal S, Rao PT, Venkatesham B, Roshaiah M, Abbineni C, Khanna I, 
Jadhav VP, Suresh J, Talwar R, Muzeeb S, Receveur JM, Frimurer TM, Rist Ø, 
Elster L, Högberg T.

Author information:
(1)Discovery Research, Dr. Reddy's Laboratories Ltd, Bollaram Road, Miyapur, 
Hyderabad 500 049, India. sasmalpk@yahoo.co.in

Melanin concentrating hormone (MCH) is an important mediator of energy 
homeostasis and plays role in several disorders such as obesity, stress, 
depression and anxiety. The synthesis and biological evaluation of novel 
benzimidazole derivatives as MCHR1 antagonists are described. The in vivo proof 
of principle for weight loss with a lead compound from this series is 
exemplified.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2010.07.086
PMID: 20724156 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


235. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2010 Dec;335(3):799-806. doi: 10.1124/jpet.110.174029.
 Epub 2010 Sep 10.

Two naturally occurring mutations in the type 1 melanin-concentrating hormone 
receptor abolish agonist-induced signaling.

Goldstein C(1), Schroeder JC, Fortin JP, Goss JM, Schaus SE, Beinborn M, Kopin 
AS.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Pharmacology Research Center, Molecular Cardiology Research 
Institute, Tufts Medical Center, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, 
Massachusetts 02111, USA.

The melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) receptor type 1 (MCHR1) is a 
seven-transmembrane domain protein that modulates orexigenic activity of MCH, 
the corresponding endogenous peptide agonist. MCH antagonists are being explored 
as a potential treatment for obesity. In the current study, we examined the 
pharmacological impact of 11 naturally occurring mutations in the human MCHR1. 
Wild-type and mutant receptors were transiently expressed in human embryonic 
kidney 293 cells. MCHR1-mediated, Gα(i)-dependent signaling was monitored by 
using luciferase reporter gene assays. Two mutants, R210H and P377S, failed to 
respond to MCH. Five other variants showed significant alterations in MCH 
efficacy, ranging from 44 to 142% of the wild-type value. At each of the 
MCH-responsive mutants, agonist potency and inhibition by (S)-methyl 
3-((3-(4-(3-acetamidophenyl)piperidin-1-yl)propyl)carbamoyl)-4-(3,4-difluorophenyl)-6-(methoxymethyl)-2-oxo-1,2,3,4-tetrahydropyrimidine-5-carboxylate 
(SNAP-7941), an established MCHR1 small-molecule antagonist, were similar to 
wild type. To explore the basis for inactivity of the R210H and P377S mutants, 
we examined expression levels of these receptors. Assessment by enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay revealed that cell surface expression of both nonfunctional 
receptors was comparable with wild type. Overnight treatment with SNAP-7941, 
followed by washout of antagonist, enhanced MCH induced signaling by the 
wild-type receptor and restored MCH responsiveness of the P377S but not the 
R210H variant. It is of note that the two loss-of-function mutants were 
identified in markedly underweight individuals, raising the possibility that a 
lean phenotype may be linked to deficient MCHR1 signaling. Formal association 
studies with larger cohorts are needed to explore the extent to which 
signaling-deficient MCHR1 variants influence the maintenance of body weight.

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.110.174029
PMCID: PMC2993548
PMID: 20833795 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Bioorg Med Chem. 2010 Nov 1;18(21):7365-79. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2010.09.014.
Epub  2010 Sep 15.

Building a MCHR1 homology model provides insight into the receptor-antagonist 
contacts that are important for the development of new anti-obesity agents.

Cirauqui N(1), Schrey AK, Galiano S, Ceras J, Pérez-Silanes S, Aldana I, Monge 
A, Kühne R.

Author information:
(1)Unidad en Investigación y Desarrollo de Medicamentos, Centro de Investigación 
en Farmacobiología Aplicada, Universidad de Navarra, C/Irunlarrea, s/n, 31080 
Pamplona, Spain.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) regulates feeding and energy homeostasis 
through interaction with its receptor, the melanin-concentrating receptor 1 
(MCHR1), making it a target in the treatment of obesity. Molecular modeling and 
docking studies were performed in order to find a binding model for the docking 
of two new series of MCHR1 antagonists to the receptor. Results suggested 
interactions between the ligands and two glutamines (Gln5.42 and Gln6.55) not 
conserved in many of the GPCRs family members. Histamine 3 receptor (HRH3) 
presents two apolar residues in the aforementioned positions and the available 
biological data against this receptor supported the role of the two glutamines 
in the binding of antagonists to the MCHR1. This knowledge could be useful in 
the development of new, more active and more selective MCHR1 antagonists.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmc.2010.09.014
PMID: 20932767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Cell Mol Biol (Noisy-le-grand). 2010 Sep 11;56 Suppl:OL1359-65.

Generation of mammalian cell lines with gene knock-down for human MCHR2.

Yuan C(1), Lu W, Xiang T, Yi F, Liu G, Ren G, Song F.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Oncology and Epigenetics Laboratory, The First Affiliated Hospital, 
Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, People's Republic of China.

Appetite regulating neuropeptide melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) has been 
implicated in obesity. It functions through its two receptors MCHR1 and MCHR2. 
While MCH and MCHR1 have been studied more extensively, the function of MCHR2 
remains largely unknown, due to the lack of suitable in vitro and in vivo 
models. To create an in vitro system of genetic knock-down of MCHR2 in mammalian 
cells, we constructed four small hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) against human MCHR2 in 
eukaryotic expression vector, and transfected the plasmids into CHO cells that 
stably express human MCHR2. Using the empty vector or a negative shRNA control 
plasmid, we show that MCHR2-shRNAs suppressed 45.8% - 66.4% of MCHR2 expression 
at both mRNA and protein levels. As the result, in cells carrying the 
MCHR2-shRNAs, binding of MCHR2 to MCH was decreased by 39.4% - 78.7% accompanied 
by a similar decrease in affinity of the receptor to ligand by 40.9% - 81.9%. 
These cells still respond to MCH treatment, but intracellular Ca2+ release as 
the downstream signaling event was also decreased by 114.8% - 822.4%. Together, 
this study generated a set of shRNAs and cell lines as valuable reagents for 
further study on MCHR2 functions. These results will ultimately help to advance 
our knowledge about appetite regulating neuropeptide receptors.

PMID: 20937223 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Behav Brain Res. 2011 Apr 15;218(2):259-66. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2010.10.035.
Epub  2010 Nov 4.

Depressive-like profile induced by MCH microinjections into the dorsal raphe 
nucleus evaluated in the forced swim test.

Lagos P(1), Urbanavicius J, Scorza MC, Miraballes R, Torterolo P.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Fisiología, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de la 
República, General Flores 2125, 11800 Montevideo, Uruguay.

Antagonism of the melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) receptor 1 (MCH-R1) has 
been recently shown to have antidepressant-like profile in rats. However, the 
mechanisms by which the MCHergic system participates in the modulation of 
emotional states are still to be determined. In the present study we confirmed 
the presence of MCHergic fibers within the dorsal raphe nucleus (DRN), a 
serotonergic nucleus involved in the physiopathology of major depression. We 
also assessed the effects of the administration of MCH and anti-MCH antibody 
(immunoneutralization) into the DRN using the forced swim test in rats, an 
animal model to screen antidepressant drugs. We found that a low dose of MCH (50 
ng) evoked a depressive-like behavior indicated by a significant increase in the 
immobility time as well as a decrease in climbing behavior. Furthermore, the 
depressive-like response was prevented by pretreatment with fluoxetine. 
Consistent with these results, the immunoneutralization of MCH produced an 
antidepressant-like effect. By means of the open field test we discarded that 
these effects were related to unspecific changes in motor activity. Our results 
suggest that the MCHergic neurons are involved in the regulation of emotional 
behaviors through the modulation of the serotonergic neuronal activity within 
the DRN. In addition, the present results are in agreement with previous reports 
showing that antagonism of the MCHergic system may be a novel therapeutic 
strategy for the treatment of depressive disorders.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2010.10.035
PMID: 21056060 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Behav Brain Res. 2011 Mar 17;218(1):42-50. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2010.11.019.
Epub  2010 Nov 11.

Contribution of melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH1) receptor to 
thermoregulation and sleep stabilization: evidence from MCH1 (-/-) mice.

Ahnaou A(1), Dautzenberg FM, Huysmans H, Steckler T, Drinkenburg WH.

Author information:
(1)Janssen Pharmaceutical Companies of Johnson & Johnson, Dept. of 
Neurosciences, A Division of Janssen Pharmaceutica NV, Turnhoutseweg 30, B-2340 
Beerse, Belgium. aahnaou@prd.jnj.com

Recent studies have explored the implication of melanin-concentrating hormone 
(MCH) in the process of vigilance states. The current experiments were carried 
out in mice lacking the MCH(1) receptor (-/-) and wild-type (WT) littermates, to 
assess the role of MCH(1) receptor in the regulation of sleep architecture, body 
temperature (BT) and locomotor activity (LMA) under normal condition and 
following a 1h restraint stress at lights onset. Under baseline conditions, 
MCH(1) (-/-) mice exhibited consistent changes in waking and sleeping time 
across the 24-h recording period. We found an increase in the amount of 
wakefulness (MCH(1) (-/-) 680.1 ± 15.3 min vs. WT, 601.9 ± 18.1, p<0.05) at the 
expense of total duration of non rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep (MCH(1) (-/-) 
664.1 ± 13.9 min vs. WT 750.1 ± 18.5, p<0.05). Additionally, MCH(1) (-/-) mice 
had a higher mean basal body temperature (MCH(1) (-/-), 36.6 ± 0.1°C vs. WT, 
36.0 ± 0.1°C, p<0.05), particularly during the light-resting period. Restraint 
stress resulted in an immediate increase in wakefulness with a concomitant 
reduction in NREM sleep and REM sleep in both genotypes, followed by a 
homeostatic rebound sleep. A concomitant long lasting increase in BT, 
independently of the behavioural state accompanied those changes in both 
genotypes. The elevated basal body temperature and reduction in NREM sleep time 
resulting from shorter NREM episode durations observed in MCH(1) (-/-) suggests 
that central MCH(1) receptor has a role in thermoregulation and presumably 
stabilization of NREM sleep.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2010.11.019
PMID: 21074567 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


240. J Recept Signal Transduct Res. 2010 Dec;30(6):385-402. doi: 
10.3109/10799893.2010.524223. Epub 2010 Nov 18.

Cellular models for the study of the pharmacology and signaling of 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptors.

Eberle AN(1), Mild G, Zumsteg U.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Endocrinology, Department of Biomedicine, University Hospital 
and University Children's Hospital, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.

Cellular models for the study of the neuropeptide melanin-concentrating hormone 
(MCH) have become indispensable tools for pharmacological profiling and 
signaling analysis of MCH and its synthetic analogues. Although expression of 
MCH receptors is most abundant in the brain, MCH-R(1) is also found in different 
peripheral tissues. Therefore, not only cell lines derived from nervous tissue 
but also from peripheral tissues that naturally express MCH receptors have been 
used to study receptor signaling and regulation. For screening of novel 
compounds, however, heterologous expression of MCH-R(1) or MCH-R(2) genes in 
HEK293, Chinese hamster ovary, COS-7, or 3T3-L1 cells, or amplified MCH-R(1) 
expression/signaling in IRM23 cells transfected with the G(q) protein gene are 
the preferred tools because of more distinct pharmacological effects induced by 
MCH, which include inhibition of cAMP formation, stimulation of inositol 
triphosphate production, increase in intracellular free Ca(2+) and/or activation 
of mitogen-activated protein kinases. Most of the published data originate from 
this type of model system, whereas data based on studies with cell lines 
endogenously expressing MCH receptors are more limited. This review presents an 
update on the different cellular models currently used for the analysis of MCH 
receptor interaction and signaling.

DOI: 10.3109/10799893.2010.524223
PMID: 21083507 [Indexed for MEDLINE]241. Exp Dermatol. 2011 Jan;20(1):35-40. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0625.2010.01181.x.

Autoantibodies against tyrosine hydroxylase in patients with non-segmental 
(generalised) vitiligo.

Kemp EH(1), Emhemad S, Akhtar S, Watson PF, Gawkrodger DJ, Weetman AP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Metabolism, School of Medicine, University of Sheffield, 
Sheffield, UK. e.h.kemp@sheffield.ac.uk

Vitiligo is an acquired idiopathic hypomelanotic skin disorder characterised by 
depigmented macules because of loss of cutaneous melanocytes. Although the exact 
cause of vitiligo remains obscure, evidence suggests that autoimmunity plays a 
role in the pathogenesis of the disease. Previously, tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) 
was identified as a putative autoantigen in vitiligo using phage-display 
technology. In this study, the prevalence of TH antibodies in patients with 
vitiligo was investigated. A radioimmunoassay (RIA) was used to detect TH 
antibodies in sera from patients with either non-segmental vitiligo (n=79), 
segmental vitiligo (n=8) or other autoimmune diseases without concomitant 
vitiligo (n=91). Sera from healthy individuals (n=28) were also tested. Patients 
with segmental vitiligo, healthy controls and patients with other autoimmune 
diseases without concomitant vitiligo were all negative for TH antibody 
reactivity. Of 79 patients with non-segmental vitiligo, 18 (23%) were positive 
for TH antibodies in the RIA, and a significant increase in the prevalence of TH 
antibodies in patients with non-segmental vitiligo was evident when compared 
with controls (P=0.003). TH antibody prevalence was also significantly elevated 
in patients with active vitiligo compared to those with stable disease 
(P=0.009). Overall, the results indicate that TH is an antibody target in 
non-segmental but not in segmental vitiligo and that TH antibodies appear to be 
more frequent in patients with active vitiligo.

© 2010 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0625.2010.01181.x
PMID: 21158937 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Int J Mol Med. 2011 May;27(5):725-9. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2011.629. Epub 2011
Feb  28.

Immunodetection of the MCHR1 antibody in vitiligo patient sera.

Zhou M(1), Guan C, Lin F, Xu W, Fu L, Hong W, Wan Y, Xu A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, the Third People's Hospital of Hangzhou, Hangzhou 
310009, PR China.

Human vitiligo is an acquired depigmenting skin disorder characterized by 
milk-white skin macules resulting from a chronic and progressive loss of 
melanocytes. It has been suggested that autoimmune mechanisms are involved in 
this disorder. We undertook this project to obtain an MCHR1-C linear peptide 
containing four main MCHR1 B-cell epitopes in an attempt to detect the IgG 
antibody against MCHR1 in vitiligo. The target gene encoding the MCHR1-C peptide 
was cloned into a pGEX-4T-2 expression vector, expressed in Escherichia coli 
BL21, and purified using a GST column. The molecular weight was analyzed by 
SDS-PAGE and western blotting. The IgG antibody response to MCHR1 was detected 
by ELISA with MCHR1-C as a coated antigen, and the absorption experiment was 
used to assess the binding ability of the Ab detected by MCHR1-C with a membrane 
protein in human epidermal melanocytes. The purified peptide MCHR1-C with a 
molecular weight of 33 kDa was obtained, and could bind to the MCHR1 antibody in 
human sera. Of the vitiligo patient sera examined, 24 of 145 (16.55%) tested 
positive for the MCHR1 antibody, and the frequency in the vitiligo patient group 
was significantly greater compared to the normal control. However, no 
significant difference between gender, disease duration, clinical subtype or 
family history between the two groups was observed. In addition, the Ab detected 
by MCHR1-C in sera was specifically absorbed by the membrane protein obtained 
from human epidermal melanocytes. Collectively, our data suggest that the 
MCHR1-C peptide can be used to detect the MCHR1 antibody in vitiligo patients as 
a coated antigen instead of MCHR1 protein. We conclude that the level of MCHR1 
antibody in active vitiligo patients is significantly higher than that in 
healthy individuals, while gender, disease duration, clinical subtype and family 
history have no association with the level of MCHR1 antibody in vitiligo 
patients.

DOI: 10.3892/ijmm.2011.629
PMID: 21369690 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


243. J Chem Inf Model. 2011 Mar 28;51(3):635-46. doi: 10.1021/ci100355c. Epub
2011  Mar 3.

New insights into the binding mode of melanin concentrating hormone receptor-1 
antagonists: homology modeling and explicit membrane molecular dynamics 
simulation study.

Helal MA(1), Chittiboyina AG, Avery MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, School of Pharmacy, University of 
Mississippi, University, Mississippi 38677, United States.

Melanin concentrating hormone (MCH) is a cyclic 19-amino-acid peptide expressed 
mainly in the hypothalamus. It is involved in the control of feeding behavior, 
energy homeostasis, and body weight. Administration of MCH-R1 antagonists has 
been proved to reduce food intake and cause weight loss in animal models. In the 
present study, a homology model of the human MCH-R1 was constructed using the 
crystal structure of bovine rhodopsin (PDB: 1u19) as a template. Based on the 
observation that MCH-R1 can bind ligands of high chemical diversity, the initial 
model was subjected to an extensive ligand-supported refinement using 
antagonists of different chemotypes. The refinement process involved stepwise 
energy minimizations and molecular dynamics simulations. The refined model was 
inserted into a pre-equilibrated DPPC/TIP3P membrane system and then simulated 
for 20 ns in complex with structurally diverse antagonists. This protocol was 
able to explain the SAR of MCH-R1 antagonists with diverse chemical structures. 
Moreover, it reveals new insights into the critical recognition sites within the 
receptor. This work represents the first detailed study of molecular dynamics of 
MCH-R1 inserted into a membrane-aqueous environment.

DOI: 10.1021/ci100355c
PMCID: PMC3090266
PMID: 21370821 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2011 Apr 15;21(8):2460-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bmcl.2011.02.046.  Epub 2011 Mar 15.

Novel pyrrolidine melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 antagonists with 
reduced hERG inhibition.

Fox BM(1), Natero R, Richard K, Connors R, Roveto PM, Beckmann H, Haller K, 
Golde J, Xiao SH, Kayser F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry Research & Discovery, Amgen Inc., 1120 Veterans 
Boulevard, South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA.

We discovered novel pyrrolidine MCHR1 antagonist 1 possessing moderate potency. 
Profiling of pyrrolidine 1 demonstrated that it was an inhibitor of the hERG 
channel. Investigation of the structure-activity relationship of this class of 
pyrrolidines allowed us to optimize the MCHR1 potency and decrease the hERG 
inhibition. Increasing the acidity of the amide proton by converting the 
benzamide in lead 1 to an anilide provided single digit nanomolar MCHR1 
antagonists while replacing the dimethoxyphenyl ring of 1 with alkyl groups 
possessing increased polarity dramatically reduced the hERG inhibition.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2011.02.046
PMID: 21414780 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2011 Apr 15;21(8):2309-12. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2011.02.099. Epub 2011 Feb 26.

Synthesis and SAR investigations of novel 2-arylbenzimidazole derivatives as 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCH-R1) antagonists.

Lim CJ(1), Kim N, Lee EK, Lee BH, Oh KS, Yoo SE, Yi KY.

Author information:
(1)Bio-organic Science Division, Korea Research Institute of Chemical 
Technology, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-600, Republic of Korea.

Compounds containing 2-arybenzimidazole ring systems linked to arylpiperidines 
were synthesized and evaluated as MCH-R1 antagonists. The results of 
structure-activity relationship studies led to the identification of compound 4c 
as a potent MCH-R1 antagonist (IC(50)=1 nM). This compound also has good 
metabolic stability, and favorable pharmacokinetic and brain penetration 
properties. However 4c was found to be potent inhibitor of the hERG potassium 
channel.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2011.02.099
PMID: 21420863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Expert Opin Ther Pat. 2011 Jun;21(6):905-25. doi:
10.1517/13543776.2011.575063.  Epub 2011 Apr 14.

Recent progress in the discovery of melanin-concentrating hormone 1-receptor 
antagonists.

Johansson A(1).

Author information:
(1)AstraZeneca R&D Mölndal, Mölndal, Sweden. anders.m.johansson@astrazeneca.com

INTRODUCTION: The appetite stimulating effects of melanin-concentrating hormone 
(MCH) continues to be of high interest, and there is substantial support to 
investigate the use of MCH 1-receptor antagonists for the treatment of obesity. 
Other areas of potential use for MCH 1-receptor antagonists include depression 
and anxiety. There are, to date, no clinical proof of concept data, and efforts 
are ongoing for the discovery of novel MCH 1-receptor antagonists, as evidenced 
by the number of patent applications published over the last 5 years.
AREAS COVERED: This review covers the patent literature on MCH 1-receptor 
antagonists from January 2006 to November 2010. The emphasis is on disclosed 
biological data, especially in vivo data, of exemplified compounds. Wherever 
possible, selectivity towards undesired pharmacology is analysed.
EXPERT OPINION: Over the years, different approaches have been taken to overcome 
the undesired effects of MCH 1-receptor antagonists, such as interactions with 
the hERG channel. Many programmes have faced difficulties and, to date, only a 
few compounds have progressed into humans. From this point of view, the MCH 
1-receptor is regarded as a difficult target, and whether newer programmes will 
be successful depends, to a large extent, on their selectivity.

DOI: 10.1517/13543776.2011.575063
PMID: 21492020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


247. BMC Genomics. 2011 Apr 19;12:200. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-200.

Gene expression patterns in four brain areas associate with quantitative measure 
of estrous behavior in dairy cows.

Kommadath A(1), Woelders H, Beerda B, Mulder HA, de Wit AA, Veerkamp RF, te Pas 
MF, Smits MA.

Author information:
(1)Animal Breeding and Genomics Centre, Wageningen UR Livestock Research, 
Lelystad, The Netherlands. arun.kommadath@wur.nl

BACKGROUND: The decline noticed in several fertility traits of dairy cattle over 
the past few decades is of major concern. Understanding of the genomic factors 
underlying fertility, which could have potential applications to improve 
fertility, is very limited. Here, we aimed to identify and study those genes 
that associated with a key fertility trait namely estrous behavior, among genes 
expressed in four bovine brain areas (hippocampus, amygdala, dorsal hypothalamus 
and ventral hypothalamus), either at the start of estrous cycle, or at mid 
cycle, or regardless of the phase of cycle.
RESULTS: An average heat score was calculated for each of 28 primiparous cows in 
which estrous behavior was recorded for at least two consecutive estrous cycles 
starting from 30 days post-partum. Gene expression was then measured in brain 
tissue samples collected from these cows, 14 of which were sacrificed at the 
start of estrus and 14 around mid cycle. For each brain area, gene expression 
was modeled as a function of the orthogonally transformed average heat score 
values using a Bayesian hierarchical mixed model. Genes whose expression 
patterns showed significant linear or quadratic relationships with heat scores 
were identified. These included genes expected to be related to estrous behavior 
as they influence states like socio-sexual behavior, anxiety, stress and feeding 
motivation (OXT, AVP, POMC, MCHR1), but also genes whose association with 
estrous behavior is novel and warrants further investigation.
CONCLUSIONS: Several genes were identified whose expression levels in the bovine 
brain associated with the level of expression of estrous behavior. The genes OXT 
and AVP play major roles in regulating estrous behavior in dairy cows. Genes 
related to neurotransmission and neuronal plasticity are also involved in 
estrous regulation, with several genes and processes expressed in mid-cycle 
probably contributing to proper expression of estrous behavior in the next 
estrus. Studying these genes and the processes they control improves our 
understanding of the genomic regulation of estrous behavior expression.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-200
PMCID: PMC3110153
PMID: 21504592 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Front Neurol. 2011 Mar 18;2:14. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2011.00014. eCollection
2011.

Melanin-concentrating hormone: a new sleep factor?

Torterolo P(1), Lagos P, Monti JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, University of the Republic 
Montevideo, Uruguay.

Neurons containing the neuropeptide melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) are 
mainly located in the lateral hypothalamus and the incerto-hypothalamic area, 
and have widespread projections throughout the brain. While the biological 
functions of this neuropeptide are exerted in humans through two metabotropic 
receptors, the MCHR1 and MCHR2, only the MCHR1 is present in rodents. Recently, 
it has been shown that the MCHergic system is involved in the control of sleep. 
We can summarize the experimental findings as follows: (1) The areas related to 
the control of sleep and wakefulness have a high density of MCHergic fibers and 
receptors. (2) MCHergic neurons are active during sleep, especially during rapid 
eye movement (REM) sleep. (3) MCH knockout mice have less REM sleep, notably 
under conditions of negative energy balance. Animals with genetically 
inactivated MCHR1 also exhibit altered vigilance state architecture and sleep 
homeostasis. (4) Systemically administered MCHR1 antagonists reduce sleep. (5) 
Intraventricular microinjection of MCH increases both slow wave sleep (SWS) and 
REM sleep; however, the increment in REM sleep is more pronounced. (6) 
Microinjection of MCH into the dorsal raphe nucleus increases REM sleep time. 
REM seep is inhibited by immunoneutralization of MCH within this nucleus. (7) 
Microinjection of MCH in the nucleus pontis oralis of the cat enhances REM sleep 
time and reduces REM sleep latency. All these data strongly suggest that MCH has 
a potent role in the promotion of sleep. Although both SWS and REM sleep are 
facilitated by MCH, REM sleep seems to be more sensitive to MCH modulation.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2011.00014
PMCID: PMC3080035
PMID: 21516258


249. Regul Pept. 2011 Aug 8;169(1-3):6-12. doi: 10.1016/j.regpep.2011.04.001.
Epub  2011 May 1.

Signalling pathway of goldfish melanin-concentrating hormone receptors 1 and 2.

Hamamoto A(1), Mizusawa K, Takahashi A, Saito Y.

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Integrated Arts and Sciences, Hiroshima University, 1-7-1 
Kagamiyama, Higashi-hiroshima, Hiroshima 739-8521, Japan.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is the natural ligand for the MCH-1 receptor 
(MCHR1) and MCH-2 receptor (MCHR2). The MCH-MCHR1 system plays a central role in 
energy metabolism in rodents. Recently, we identified MCHR1 and MCHR2 
orthologues in goldfish, designated gfMCHR1 and gfMCHR2. In a mammalian 
cell-based assay, calcium mobilization was evoked by gfMCHR2 via both Gαi/o and 
Gαq, while the gfMCHR1-mediated response was exclusively dependent on Gαq. This 
coupling capacity to G proteins is in contrast to human MCHR1 and MCHR2. Here, 
we extended our previous characterization of the two gfMCHRs by examining their 
different signalling pathway. We found that MCH caused activation of 
extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1 and 2 (ERK1/2) via both gfMCHR1 and 
gfMCHR2 in dose-dependent manners. Unlike the case for gfMCHR2, gfMCHR1 
signalling was not sensitive to pertussis toxin, suggesting Gαq coupling of 
gfMCHR1 in the ERK1/2 pathway as well as a calcium mobilization system. Cyclic 
AMP assays revealed that gfMCHR2 was efficiently coupled to Gαi/o, while gfMCHR1 
was weakly coupled to Gαs. Finally, we investigated the transduction features 
stimulated by two mammalian MCH analogues. As expected, Compound 15, which is a 
full agonist of human MCHR1, was a potent gfMCHR1 agonist in multiple signalling 
pathways. On the other hand, Compound 30, which is a human MCHR1-selective 
antagonist with negligible agonist potency, unexpectedly acted as a selective 
agonist of gfMCHR1. These results are the first to demonstrate that gfMCHR1 and 
gfMCHR2 have quite different signalling properties from human MCHRs.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.regpep.2011.04.001
PMID: 21539863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


250. PLoS One. 2011;6(5):e17711. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017711. Epub 2011 May
26.

Allele-specific, age-dependent and BMI-associated DNA methylation of human 
MCHR1.

Stepanow S(1), Reichwald K, Huse K, Gausmann U, Nebel A, Rosenstiel P, Wabitsch 
M, Fischer-Posovszky P, Platzer M.

Author information:
(1)Genome Analysis, Leibniz Institute for Age Research, Jena, Germany. 
stepanow@fli-leibniz.de

BACKGROUND: Melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1) plays a significant 
role in regulation of energy balance, food intake, physical activity and body 
weight in humans and rodents. Several association studies for human obesity 
showed contrary results concerning the SNPs rs133072 (G/A) and rs133073 (T/C), 
which localize to the first exon of MCHR1. The variations constitute two main 
haplotypes (GT, AC). Both SNPs affect CpG dinucleotides, whereby each haplotype 
contains a potential methylation site at one of the two SNP positions. In 
addition, 15 CpGs in close vicinity of these SNPs constitute a weak CpG island. 
Here, we studied whether DNA methylation in this sequence context may contribute 
to population- and age-specific effects of MCHR1 alleles in obesity.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We analyzed DNA methylation of a 315 bp region of MCHR1 
encompassing rs133072 and rs133073 and the CpG island in blood samples of 49 
individuals by bisulfite sequencing. The AC haplotype shows a significantly 
higher methylation level than the GT haplotype. This allele-specific methylation 
is age-dependent. In young individuals (20-30 years) the difference in DNA 
methylation between haplotypes is significant; whereas in individuals older than 
60 years it is not detectable. Interestingly, the GT allele shows a decrease in 
methylation status with increasing BMI, whereas the methylation of the AC allele 
is not associated with this phenotype. Heterozygous lymphoblastoid cell lines 
show the same pattern of allele-specific DNA methylation. The cell line, which 
exhibits the highest difference in methylation levels between both haplotypes, 
also shows allele-specific transcription of MCHR1, which can be abolished by 
treatment with the DNA methylase inhibitor 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine.
CONCLUSIONS: We show that DNA methylation at MCHR1 is allele-specific, 
age-dependent, BMI-associated and affects transcription. Conceivably, this 
epigenetic regulation contributes to the age- and/or population specific effects 
reported for MCHR1 in several human obesity studies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017711
PMCID: PMC3102661
PMID: 21637341 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


251. Behav Brain Res. 2011 Oct 10;224(1):195-200. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2011.05.039.
 Epub 2011 Jun 6.

Ablation of the hypothalamic neuropeptide melanin concentrating hormone is 
associated with behavioral abnormalities that reflect impaired olfactory 
integration.

Adams AC(1), Domouzoglou EM, Chee MJ, Segal-Lieberman G, Pissios P, 
Maratos-Flier E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical 
Center, Center for Life Sciences, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is an orexigenic hypothalamic neuropeptide. 
At least one receptor, MCH receptor 1 (MCHR1), is present in all mammals and is 
expressed widely throughout the brain, including cortex, striatum and structures 
implicated in the integration of olfactory cues such as the piriform cortex and 
olfactory bulb. Consistent with a potential role for MCH in mediating olfactory 
function, MCH knockout mice demonstrate abnormal olfactory behaviors. These 
behaviors include impaired food seeking by both genders in the context of normal 
levels of exploratory behavior, suggesting impaired olfaction. Males also 
exhibit increased aggression while females show defects in several olfactory 
mediated behaviors including mating, estrous cycle synchronization and maternal 
behavior. These findings suggest that hypothalamic inputs through MCH play an 
important role in regulating sensory integration from olfactory pathways.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2011.05.039
PMCID: PMC4862865
PMID: 21669232 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


252. mBio. 2011 Jun 21;2(3):e00115-11. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00115-11. Print 2011.

New channelrhodopsin with a red-shifted spectrum and rapid kinetics from 
Mesostigma viride.

Govorunova EG(1), Spudich EN, Lane CE, Sineshchekov OA, Spudich JL.

Author information:
(1)Center for Membrane Biology, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular 
Biology, University of Texas Medical School, Houston, Texas, USA.

Light control of motility behavior (phototaxis and photophobic responses) in 
green flagellate algae is mediated by sensory rhodopsins homologous to 
phototaxis receptors and light-driven ion transporters in prokaryotic organisms. 
In the phototaxis process, excitation of the algal sensory rhodopsins leads to 
generation of transmembrane photoreceptor currents. When expressed in animal 
cells, the algal phototaxis receptors function as light-gated cation channels, 
which has earned them the name "channelrhodopsins." Channelrhodopsins have 
become useful molecular tools for light control of cellular activity. Only four 
channelrhodopsins, identified in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii and Volvox carteri, 
have been reported so far. By screening light-induced currents among algal 
species, we identified that the phylogenetically distant flagellate Mesostigma 
viride showed photoelectrical responses in vivo with properties suggesting a 
channelrhodopsin especially promising for optogenetic use. We cloned an M. 
viride channelrhodopsin, MChR1, and studied its channel activity upon 
heterologous expression. Action spectra in HEK293 cells match those of the 
photocurrents observed in M. viride cells. Comparison of the more divergent 
MChR1 sequence to the previously studied phylogenetically clustered homologs and 
study of several MChR1 mutants refine our understanding of the sequence 
determinants of channelrhodopsin function. We found that MChR1 has the most 
red-shifted and pH-independent spectral sensitivity so far reported, matches or 
surpasses known channelrhodopsins' channel kinetics features, and undergoes 
minimal inactivation upon sustained illumination. This combination of properties 
makes MChR1 a promising candidate for optogenetic applications.

© 2011 Govorunova et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00115-11
PMCID: PMC3119535
PMID: 21693637 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2011 Sep 15;21(18):5310-4. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2011.07.020. Epub 2011 Jul 14.

Strategies to lower the Pgp efflux liability in a series of potent indole 
azetidine MCHR1 antagonists.

Lu K(1), Jiang Y, Chen B, Eldemenky EM, Ma G, Packiarajan M, Chandrasena G, 
White AD, Jones KA, Li B, Hong SP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical and Pharmacokinetic Sciences, Lundbeck Research USA, 
215 College Road, Paramus, NJ 07652, USA.

A series of potent indolyl azetidine rMCHR1 antagonists were found to show poor 
CNS penetration due to Pgp efflux. We envisioned a strategy which included: 
lowering basicity; changing the conformational flexibility motif; and removal of 
a hydrogen bond donor, in an attempt to optimize this property while maintaining 
target receptor efficacy. This work resulted in mitigation of Pgp efflux, and 
led us to identify 1-dihydroindolyl azetidine derivatives with CNS penetration 
and excellent rMCHR1 binding affinity.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2011.07.020
PMID: 21802292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Bioorg Med Chem. 2011 Sep 15;19(18):5539-52. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2011.07.038.
 Epub 2011 Jul 26.

Discovery, synthesis, and structure-activity relationship of 
6-aminomethyl-7,8-dihydronaphthalenes as human melanin-concentrating hormone 
receptor 1 antagonists.

Kamata M(1), Yamashita T, Imaeda T, Tanaka T, Terauchi J, Miyamoto M, Ora T, 
Tawada M, Endo S, Takekawa S, Asami A, Suzuki N, Nagisa Y, Nakano Y, Watanabe K, 
Ogino H, Kato K, Kato K, Ishihara Y.

Author information:
(1)Pharmaceutical Research Division, Takeda Pharmaceutical Company Limited, 
17-85 Jusohonmachi, 2-Chome, Yodogawa-ku, Osaka 532-8686, Japan. 
Kamata_Makoto@takeda.co.jp

Human melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (hMCHR1) antagonists are 
promising targets for obesity treatment. We identified the tetrahydronaphthalene 
derivative 1a with modest binding affinity for hMCHR1 by screening an in-house G 
protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) ligand library. We synthesized a series of 
6-aminomethyl-5,6,7,8-tetrahydronaphthalenes and evaluated their activity as 
hMCHR1 antagonists. Modification of the biphenylcarbonylamino group revealed 
that the biphenyl moiety played a crucial role in the interaction of the 
antagonist with the receptor. The stereoselective effect of the chiral center on 
binding affinity generated the novel 6-aminomethyl-7,8-dihydronaphthalene 
scaffold without a chiral center. Optimization of the amino group led to the 
identification of a potent antagonist 2s 
(4'-fluoro-N-[6-(1-pyrrolidinylmethyl)-7,8-dihydro-2-naphthalenyl][1,1'-biphenyl]-4-carboxamide), 
which significantly inhibited the nocturnal food intake in rats after oral 
administration. Pharmacokinetic analysis confirmed that 2s had good oral 
bioavailability and brain penetrance. This antagonist appears to be a viable 
lead compound that can be used to develop a promising therapy for obesity.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmc.2011.07.038
PMID: 21856163 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2012 Jan;100(3):581-6. doi:
10.1016/j.pbb.2011.08.009.  Epub 2011 Sep 7.

Expression levels of genes encoding melanin concentrating hormone (MCH) and MCH 
receptor change in taste aversion, but MCH injections do not alleviate aversive 
responses.

Mitra A(1), Klockars A, Gosnell BA, Le Grevès M, Olszewski PK, Levine AS, 
Schiöth HB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Food Science and Nutrition, University of Minnesota, Saint 
Paul, MN, USA. amitra@stkate.edu

Melanin concentrating hormone (MCH) stimulates feeding driven by energy needs 
and reward and modifies anxiety behavior. Orexigenic peptides of similar 
characteristics, including nociceptin/orphanin FQ, Agouti-related protein and 
opioids, increase consumption also by reducing avoidance of potentially tainted 
food in animals displaying a conditioned taste aversion (CTA). Herein, using 
real-time PCR, we assessed whether expression levels of genes encoding MCH and 
its receptor, MCHR1, were affected in CTA in the rat. We also investigated 
whether injecting MCH intracerebroventricularly (ICV) during the acquisition and 
retrieval of LiCl-induced CTA, would alleviate aversive responses. MCHR1 gene 
was upregulated in the hypothalamus and brain stem of aversive animals, MCH mRNA 
was significantly higher in the hypothalamus, whereas a strong trend suggesting 
upregulation of MCH and MCHR1 genes was detected in the amygdala. Despite these 
expression changes associated with aversion, MCH injected prior to the induction 
of CTA with LiCl as well as later, during the CTA retrieval upon subsequent 
presentations of the aversive tastant, did not reduce the magnitude of CTA. We 
conclude that MCH and its receptor form an orexigenic system whose expression is 
affected in CTA. This altered MCH expression may contribute to tastant-targeted 
hypophagia in CTA. However, changing the MCH tone in the brain by exogenous 
peptide was insufficient to prevent the onset or facilitate extinction of 
LiCl-induced CTA. This designates MCH as one of many accessory molecules 
associated with shaping an aversive response, but not a critical one for 
LiCl-dependent CTA to occur.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pbb.2011.08.009
PMCID: PMC3472968
PMID: 21925200 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2012 Jan 2;348(1):281-96. doi:
10.1016/j.mce.2011.09.015.  Epub 2011 Sep 14.

A preliminary investigation of the role of melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) 
and its receptors in appetite regulation of winter flounder (Pseudopleuronectes 
americanus).

Tuziak SM(1), Volkoff H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John's, 
Newfoundland, Canada A1B-3X9.

In order to better understand the role of melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) in 
the regulation of appetite in fish, the mRNAs of two forms of MCH, prepro-MCH 
and MCH2, and two forms of MCH receptors, MCH-R1 and MCH-R2, were isolated from 
winter flounder (Pseudopleuronectes americanus). In addition, the mRNA 
expressions of these peptides and their receptors were determined under fed and 
fasted conditions. Both MCHs are expressed in forebrain and midbrain, as well as 
peripheral tissues including gut and gonads. Both MCH-Rs are ubiquitously 
expressed in the brain and periphery. Fasting induced an increase in the 
expression levels of MCH and MCH-R1 mRNAs in optic tectum/thalamus and 
hypothalamus but had no effect on either MCH2 or MCH-R2 mRNA expressions. Our 
results suggest that MCH and MCH-R1, but not MCH2 and MCH-R2 might have a role 
in the regulation of appetite in flounder.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mce.2011.09.015
PMID: 21945816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Zhong Nan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2011 Sep;36(9):823-9. doi: 
10.3969/j.issn.1672-7347.2011.09.002.

[High fat diet induces obesity and alters the expression of MCHR1 and OB-Rb in 
the adipose tissue].

[Article in Chinese]

Li J(1), Yan J, Chen K, Wang Q, Zhao X, Zhang Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Pathophysiology, Xi'an Jiaotong University 
School of Medicine, Xi'an 710061, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of high-fat (HF) diet on the body weight 
and the mRNA expression of melanin concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1) and 
leptin receptor (OB-Rb) in the adipose tissue in rats, the two important and 
opposite factors in regulating the body weight.
METHODS: Post-weaning rats were divided into 3 groups: the NC group were fed a 
normal-chow diet (NC) (13% calories from fat), the HF group with a HF-diet (47% 
calories from fat) and the PHF group pair-fed a HF-diet (47% calories from fat). 
At the end of 8th week, the gained bodyweight, the plasma melanin concentrating 
hormone (MCH) and leptin, and the expression levels of MCHR1 and OB-Rb in the 
adipose tissue were measured.
RESULTS: Both the HF-diet and pair-fed HF-diet enhanced the body weight 
(P<0.01), plasma MCH (P<0.01) and leptin concentrations (P<0.05). In the adipose 
tissue, HF-diet resulted in significant increase in MCHR1 (PHF group,P<0.05) and 
decrease in OB-Rb mRNA levels (HF group,P<0.01; PHF group,P<0.05). No 
statistical difference was found between the HF group and the PHF group in terms 
of the aforementioned data (P>0.05).
CONCLUSION: Chronic intake of iso-caloric HF-diet and ad libitum HF-diet 
obviously results in increase in the body weight, serum leptin, and MCH 
concentration. Diet-induced obesity and related metabolic disorders are possibly 
correlated with up-regulated expression of MCHR1 and down-regulated expression 
of OB-Rb in the adipose tissue.

DOI: 10.3969/j.issn.1672-7347.2011.09.002
PMID: 21946196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Bioorg Med Chem. 2011 Nov 1;19(21):6261-73. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2011.09.007.
Epub  2011 Sep 10.

Melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 antagonists: synthesis, 
structure-activity relationship, docking studies, and biological evaluation of 
2,3,4,5-tetrahydro-1H-3-benzazepine derivatives.

Kasai S(1), Kamaura M, Kamata M, Aso K, Ogino H, Nakano Y, Watanabe K, Kaisho T, 
Tawada M, Nagisa Y, Takekawa S, Kato K, Suzuki N, Ishihara Y.

Author information:
(1)Pharmaceutical Research Division, Takeda Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd, 26-1 
Muraoka-Higashi 2-Chome, Fujisawa, Kanagawa 251-8555, Japan. 
Kasai_Shizuo@takeda.co.jp

Melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1) antagonists have been studied 
as potential agents for the treatment of obesity. Initial structure-activity 
relationship studies of in-house hit compound 1a and subsequent optimization 
studies resulted in the identification of tetrahydroisoquinoline derivative 23, 
1-(2-acetyl-1,2,3,4-tetrahydroisoquinolin-7-yl)-4-[4-(4-chlorophenyl)piperidin-1-yl]butan-1-one, 
as a potent hMCHR1 antagonist. A homology model of hMCHR1 suggests that these 
compounds interact with Asn 294 and Asp 123 in the binding site of hMCHR1 to 
enhance binding affinity. Oral administration of compound 23 dose-dependently 
reduced food intake in diet-induced obesity (DIO)-F344 rats.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmc.2011.09.007
PMID: 21975069 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2011 Dec 1;21(23):7001-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bmcl.2011.09.110.  Epub 2011 Oct 5.

Discovery of a novel series of melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 
antagonists for the treatment of obesity.

Mihalic JT(1), Chen X, Fan P, Chen X, Fu Y, Liang L, Reed M, Tang L, Chen JL, 
Jaen J, Li L, Dai K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Amgen, South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA. 
jmihalic@amgen.com

A new class of MCHR1 antagonists was discovered via a high-throughput screen. 
Optimization of the lead structure resulted in the identification of indole 10e. 
This compound possesses good pharmacokinetic properties across preclinical 
species and is efficacious in reducing food consumption in an MCH cannulated rat 
model and a cynomolgus monkey food consumption model.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2011.09.110
PMID: 22019296 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Psychiatr Genet. 2012 Apr;22(2):62-9. doi: 10.1097/YPG.0b013e32834dc424.

The gene encoding the melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 is associated 
with schizophrenia in a Danish case-control sample.

Demontis D(1), Nyegaard M, Christensen JH, Severinsen J, Hedemand A, Hansen T, 
Werge T, Mors O, Børglum AD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Aarhus University, Århus, Denmark. 
ditte@humgen.au.dk

OBJECTIVE: The MCHR1 gene encoding the melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 
is located on chromosome 22q13.2 and has previously been associated with 
schizophrenia in a study of cases and controls from the Faroe Islands and 
Scotland. Herein we report an association between variations in the MCHR1 gene 
and schizophrenia, based on analyses of a larger sample and an increased number 
of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) than used in the previous study.
METHODS: Eighteen SNPs in the MCHR1 gene region were genotyped in a Caucasian 
case-control sample from Denmark consisting of 390 individuals with 
schizophrenia and 814 control individuals. Sex-specific analysis and analysis of 
association with antipsychotic treatment were performed.
RESULTS: Five SNPs in the proximal region of MCHR1 were significantly associated 
with schizophrenia. The associations seemed to be sex specific, predominantly 
seen in men where one SNP (rs133073) remained significant (P=0.003) after 
correction for multiple testing. When combining the P values in the proximal 
region of MCHR1, the region-wise P value was low (P=0.009) supporting that 
variations in this part of the gene is associated with schizophrenia. 
Furthermore, the association was stronger in patients responding to conventional 
and atypical antipsychotic medication except clozapine.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that MCHR1 may influence schizophrenia 
susceptibility, in particular among men and patients responding to conventional 
(nonclozapine) treatment.

DOI: 10.1097/YPG.0b013e32834dc424
PMID: 22081064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2012 Jan 1;22(1):427-30. doi:
10.1016/j.bmcl.2011.10.111.  Epub 2011 Nov 10.

4-arylphthalazin-1(2H)-one derivatives as potent antagonists of the melanin 
concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCH-R1).

Lim CJ(1), Kim SH, Lee BH, Oh KS, Yi KY.

Author information:
(1)Bio-organic Science Division, Korea Research Institute of Chemical 
Technology, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-600, Republic of Korea.

A novel series of 4-arylphthalazin-1(2H)-one linked to arylpiperidines were 
synthesized and evaluated as MCH-R1 antagonists. The results of an extensive SAR 
study probing the effects of substituents on the 4-arylphthalazin-1(2H)-one C-4 
aryl group led to the identification of the 4-(3,4-difluorophenyl) derivative as 
a highly potent MCH-R1 inhibitor with an IC(50)=1nM. However, further 
investigations showed that this substance has unacceptable pharmacokinetic 
properties including a high clearance and volume of distribution.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2011.10.111
PMID: 22137790 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2012 Feb;76(2):235-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijporl.2011.11.009. Epub 2011 Dec 5.

Microarray-based mutation detection of pediatric sporadic nonsyndromic hearing 
loss in China.

Qu C(1), Sun X, Shi Y, Gong A, Liang S, Zhao M, Chen Y, Liang F.

Author information:
(1)China Rehabilitation and Research Center for Deaf Children, Beijing 100029, 
People's Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the molecular etiologic causes of sporadic 
nonsyndromic hearing loss in Chinese children.
METHODS: 179 sporadic nonsyndromic hearing loss children were subjected to 
microarray-based mutation detection for nine hot spot mutations in four of the 
most common deafness-related genes, including GJB2, SLC26A4, GJB3, and 12s rRNA.
RESULTS: The incidence of positive genetic errors was 43.58% with the current 
set of target genes in sporadic nonsyndromic hearing loss children. Among them, 
25.14% of cases had genetic defects in GJB2, 16.76% of cases had pathogenic 
mutations in SLC26A4, 1.12% of cases were caused by 12s rRNA mutations, and GJB3 
mutation was detected in 0.56% of this group of patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrated that genetic factors were important causes 
for sporadic nonsyndromic hearing loss in Chinese pediatric cases. Mutations of 
GJB2 and SLC26A4 are two major genetic causes, whereas mutations of GJB3 and 12s 
rRNA result in the development of hearing loss in a small percentage of sporadic 
nonsyndromic hearing loss cases. Microarray testing is a helpful and 
instrumental screening method in the diagnosis of genetic hearing loss.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijporl.2011.11.009
PMID: 22154049 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2012 Aug;22(8):607-13. doi: 
10.1016/j.euroneuro.2011.12.001. Epub 2011 Dec 29.

The melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) system in an animal model of 
depression-like behavior.

García-Fuster MJ(1), Parks GS, Clinton SM, Watson SJ, Akil H, Civelli O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of California, Irvine, CA, United 
States. j.garcia@uib.es

Selective breeding for divergence in locomotion in a novel environment (bHR, 
bred High-Responder; bLR, bred Low-Responder) correlates with stress-reactivity, 
spontaneous anxiety-like behaviors and predicts vulnerability in a rodent model 
of depression. Identifying genetic factors that may account for such 
vulnerability are key determinants not only for the illness outcome but also for 
the development of better-tailored treatment options. Melanin-concentrating 
hormone (MCH) is a neuropeptide that exhibits some of the hallmarks of a 
regulator of affective states. The aim of this study was to ascertain the role 
of the MCH system in depression-like behaviors in bHR vs. bLR rats. bLR rats 
showed a 44% increase in hypothalamic pMCH mRNA and a 14% decrease in 
hippocampal CA1 MCH1R mRNA when compared to bHR rats. Interestingly, the amount 
of time that rats spent immobile in the FST (depressive-like behavior) 
correlated positively with the amount of hypothalamic pMCH mRNA and negatively 
with that of hippocampal CA1 MCH1R. The results indicate that the bLR-bHR is a 
useful rat model to investigate individual basal genetic differences that 
participate in the monitoring of emotional responsiveness (i.e., depression- and 
anxiety-like behaviors). They also point to the MCH system (i.e., chronically 
higher pMCH expression and consequently receptor down-regulation) as a candidate 
biomarker for the severity of depressive-like behavior. The data indicate that 
MCH1R participates in the modulation of depression-like behavior through a 
process that involves the CA1 region of the hippocampus, supporting the possible 
use of MCH1R antagonists in the treatment of depression.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. and ECNP. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.euroneuro.2011.12.001
PMCID: PMC3319808
PMID: 22209364 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors declare no 
competing financial interests in relation to the work described.


264. Curr Drug Discov Technol. 2012 Mar;9(1):25-38. doi:
10.2174/157016312799304543.

Structural analysis of 2-piperidin-4-yl-actamide derivatives for hERG blocking 
and MCH R1 antagonistic activities.

Moorthy NS(1), Ramos MJ, Fernandes PA.

Author information:
(1)Requimte, Departamento de Quimica e Bioquimica, Universidade do Porto, Porto, 
Portugal. hari.moorthy@fc.up.pt

In the present investigation, a computational based structural analysis was 
performed on a series of 2-piperidin- 4-yl-acetamide derivatives to investigate 
the physicochemical features of the molecules responsible for the hERG blocking 
and melanin concentrating hormone receptor-1 (MCH R1) antagonistic activities. 
The QSAR models derived from MLR analysis were validated by various validation 
methods and they provided significant statistical results such as Q(2), F, 
t(test), R, predicated residual error values, etc. These significant models were 
constructed with different type of physicochemical descriptors which showed that 
the hydrophobic properties on the vdW surface of the molecules are favorable for 
both the activities (MCH R1 antagonistic and hERG blocking activities) and the 
presence of polar/electronegative groups in the molecules is detrimental for 
those activities. The presence of flexible aromatic rings in the molecules has 
favorable hERG blocking activity. The MCH R1 antagonistic activity also depends 
upon the vdW volume, shape and flexibility of the molecules. In addition, the 
presented results will guide for the optimized design of novel bioactive 
molecules with less/free of hERG blocking activities to avoid unwanted potential 
cardiotoxic side effects related with the use of these possible antiarrhythmic 
and anti-obesity agents in humans.

DOI: 10.2174/157016312799304543
PMID: 22235926 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Handb Exp Pharmacol. 2012;(209):383-403. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-24716-3_18.

Antiobesity effects of melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCH-R1) 
antagonists.

Cheon HG(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Gachon University of 
Medicine and Science, Yeonsu-3 Dong, Yeonsu-Gu, Incheon, 406-799, Republic of 
Korea. hgcheon@gachon.ac.kr

Despite remarkable progress in the elucidation of energy balance and regulation, 
the development of new antiobesity drugs is still at the stage of infancy. This 
review describes the MCH and MCH receptor system with regard to its involvement 
in energy homeostasis and summarizes the pharmacological profiles of selected 
small molecule MCH-R1 antagonists that are relevant for their development as 
antiobesity drugs. Although their clinical value still has to be demonstrated, 
and challenges with regard to unwanted side effects remain to be resolved, 
MCH-R1 antagonists may provide an effective pharmacotherapy for the treatment of 
obesity in the near future.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-24716-3_18
PMID: 22249825 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


266. J Med Chem. 2012 Mar 8;55(5):2353-66. doi: 10.1021/jm201596h. Epub 2012 Feb
22.

Melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 antagonists. Synthesis and 
structure-activity relationships of novel 3-(aminomethyl)quinolines.

Kamata M(1), Yamashita T, Imaeda T, Tanaka T, Masada S, Kamaura M, Kasai S, Hara 
R, Sasaki S, Takekawa S, Asami A, Kaisho T, Suzuki N, Ashina S, Ogino H, Nakano 
Y, Nagisa Y, Kato K, Kato K, Ishihara Y.

Author information:
(1)Pharmaceutical Research Division, Takeda Pharmaceutical Company Limited, 26-1 
Muraokahigashi, 2-Chome, Fujisawa, Kanagawa 251-8555, Japan. 
Kamata_Makoto@takeda.co.jp

It was found that 3-(aminomethyl)quinoline derivatives showed high binding 
affinities for melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1) with reduced 
affinity for serotonin receptor 2c (5-HT2c) when the dihydronaphthalene nucleus 
of compound 1 (human MCHR1, IC(50) = 1.9 nM; human 5-HT2c receptor, IC(50) = 
0.53 nM) was replaced by other bicyclic core scaffolds. Among the synthesized 
compounds, 8-methylquinoline derivative 5v especially showed high binding 
affinity (IC(50) = 0.54 nM), potent in vitro antagonistic activity (IC(50) = 2.8 
nM) for MCHR1, and negligible affinity for 5-HT2c receptor (IC(50) > 1000 nM). 
Oral administration of 5v significantly and dose-dependently suppressed 
nocturnal food intake in diet-induced obese rats and did not affect food intake 
in MCHR1-deficient mice. These results and rat pharmacokinetic study findings 
suggested that compound 5v is a highly potent, orally bioavailable, and 
centrally acting nonpeptide MCHR1 antagonist.

DOI: 10.1021/jm201596h
PMID: 22309223 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2012 Apr 1;22(7):2464-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bmcl.2012.02.010.  Epub 2012 Feb 13.

An example of designed multiple ligands spanning protein classes: dual MCH-1R 
antagonists/DPPIV inhibitors.

Gattrell WT(1), Sambrook Smith CP, Smith AJ.

Author information:
(1)Prosidion Ltd, Windrush Court, Watlington Road, Oxford OX4 6LT, United 
Kingdom. wgattrell@yahoo.co.uk

A ligand-based approach to identify potential starting points for a dual MCH-1R 
antagonist/DPPIV inhibitor medicinal chemistry program was undertaken. Potential 
ligand pairs were identified by analysis of MCH-1R and DPPIV in vitro data. A 
highly targeted synthetic effort lead to the discovery of pyridone 11, a dual 
MCH-1R antagonist/DPPIV inhibitor with selectivity over DPP8 and DPP9.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2012.02.010
PMID: 22377519 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


268. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2013 Sep;27(9):1172-5. doi: 
10.1111/j.1468-3083.2012.04501.x. Epub 2012 Mar 10.

Melanocyte antigen-specific antibodies cannot be used as markers for recent 
disease activity in patients with vitiligo.

Kroon MW(1), Kemp EH, Wind BS, Krebbers G, Bos JD, Gawkrodger DJ, Wolkerstorfer 
A, van der Veen JP, Luiten RM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Netherlands Institute for Pigment Disorders, 
Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 
m.w.kroon@amc.uva.nl

BACKGROUND: Objective parameters to assess disease activity in non-segmental 
vitiligo are lacking. Melanocyte antigen-specific antibodies are frequently 
found in the sera of patients with vitiligo and the presence of these antibodies 
may correlate with disease activity.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the relationship between melanocyte antigen-specific 
antibodies and recent disease activity in patients with vitiligo and to evaluate 
the potential usefulness of this objective parameter in daily clinical practice.
METHODS: The prevalence of tyrosinase, melanoma antigen recognized by T-cells-1 
(MART1), melanin-concentrating hormone receptor-1 (MCHR1), gp100 and tyrosine 
hydroxylase (TH) antibodies was evaluated in 21 patients with non-segmental 
vitiligo and in 20 healthy controls.
RESULTS: In 21 patients, nine (42.8%) showed antibody responses against 
tyrosinase, MART1, MCHR1, gp100 or TH. No antibody responses were found in the 
20 controls. No correlation was found between the presence of antibodies and 
recent disease activity or other clinical characteristics such as age, gender, 
extension and duration of vitiligo.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, 42.8% of the vitiligo patients showed an antibody 
response to melanocyte antigen-specific antigens. However, the presence of 
antibodies against melanocytes did not correlate with recent disease activity or 
other relevant disease parameters, and for the moment screening for these 
antibodies in individual patients does not appear to be clinically relevant.

© 2012 The Authors. Journal of the European Academy of Dermatology and 
Venereology © 2012 European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1468-3083.2012.04501.x
PMID: 22404127 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2012 May 1;22(9):3157-62. doi:
10.1016/j.bmcl.2012.03.050.  Epub 2012 Mar 23.

Design and optimization of quinazoline derivatives as melanin concentrating 
hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1) antagonists.

Sasmal S(1), Balaji G, Kanna Reddy HR, Balasubrahmanyam D, Srinivas G, Kyasa S, 
Sasmal PK, Khanna I, Talwar R, Suresh J, Jadhav VP, Muzeeb S, Shashikumar D, 
Harinder Reddy K, Sebastian VJ, Frimurer TM, Rist Ø, Elster L, Högberg T.

Author information:
(1)Discovery Research, Dr. Reddy's Laboratories Ltd, Bollaram Road, Miyapur, 
Hyderabad 500049, India. pradipks@drreddys.com

Melanin concentrating hormone (MCH) is an important mediator of energy 
homeostasis and plays a role in metabolic and CNS disorders. The 
modeling-supported design, synthesis and multi-parameter optimization 
(biological activity, solubility, metabolic stability, hERG) of novel 
quinazoline derivatives as MCHR1 antagonists are described. The in vivo proof of 
principle for weight loss with a lead compound from this series is exemplified. 
Clusters of refined hMCHR1 homology models derived from the X-ray structure of 
the β2-adrenergic receptor, including extracellular loops, were developed and 
used to guide the design.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2012.03.050
PMID: 22487182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2012 May 1;22(9):3163-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bmcl.2012.03.049.  Epub 2012 Mar 23.

Design and optimization of quinazoline derivatives as melanin concentrating 
hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1) antagonists: part 2.

Sasmal S(1), Balasubrahmanyam D, Kanna Reddy HR, Balaji G, Srinivas G, Cheera S, 
Abbineni C, Sasmal PK, Khanna I, Sebastian VJ, Jadhav VP, Singh MP, Talwar R, 
Suresh J, Shashikumar D, Harinder Reddy K, Sihorkar V, Frimurer TM, Rist Ø, 
Elster L, Högberg T.

Author information:
(1)Discovery Research, Dr. Reddy's Laboratories Ltd, Bollaram Road, Miyapur, 
Hyderabad 500049, India. pradipks@drreddys.com

Melanin concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1) antagonists have potential for 
the treatment of obesity and several CNS disorders. In the preceding article, we 
have described a novel series of quinazolines as MCHR1 antagonists and 
demonstrated in vivo proof of principle with an early lead. Herein we describe 
the detailed SAR and SPR studies to identify an optimized lead candidate having 
good efficacy in a sub-chronic DIO model with a good cardiovascular safety 
window.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2012.03.049
PMID: 22497763 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2012 Jun 1;22(11):3781-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bmcl.2012.04.006.  Epub 2012 Apr 7.

Discovery of a novel melanin concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1) antagonist 
with reduced hERG inhibition.

Mihalic JT(1), Fan P, Chen X, Chen X, Fu Y, Motani A, Liang L, Lindstrom M, Tang 
L, Chen JL, Jaen J, Dai K, Li L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Amgen San Francisco, South San Francisco, CA 94080, 
USA. jmihalic@amgen.com

An initial SAR study resulted in the identification of the novel, potent MCHR1 
antagonist 2. After further profiling, compound 2 was discovered to be a potent 
inhibitor of the hERG potassium channel, which prevented its further 
development. Additional optimization of this structure resulted in the discovery 
of the potent MCHR1 antagonist 11 with a dramatically reduced hERG liability. 
The decrease in hERG activity was confirmed by several in vivo preclinical 
cardiovascular studies examining QT prolongation. This compound demonstrated 
good selectivity for MCHR1 and possessed good pharmacokinetic properties across 
preclinical species. Compound 11 was also efficacious in reducing body weight in 
two in vivo mouse models. This compound was selected for clinical evaluation and 
was given the code AMG 076.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2012.04.006
PMID: 22542010 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Dev Neurobiol. 2013 Jan;73(1):1-13. doi: 10.1002/dneu.22031. Epub 2012 Jul
20.

A truncating mutation of Alms1 reduces the number of hypothalamic neuronal cilia 
in obese mice.

Heydet D(1), Chen LX, Larter CZ, Inglis C, Silverman MA, Farrell GC, Leroux MR.

Author information:
(1)Liver Research Group, ANU Medical School at The Canberra Hospital, Canberra, 
ACT, Australia.

Primary cilia are ubiquitous cellular antennae whose dysfunction collectively 
causes various disorders, including vision and hearing impairment, as well as 
renal, skeletal, and central nervous system anomalies. One ciliopathy, Alström 
syndrome, is closely related to Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS), sharing amongst 
other phenotypic features morbid obesity. As the cellular and molecular links 
between weight regulation and cilia are poorly understood, we used the obese 
mouse strain foz/foz, bearing a truncating mutation in the Alström syndrome 
protein (Alms1), to help elucidate why it develops hyperphagia, leading to early 
onset obesity and metabolic anomalies. Our in vivo studies reveal that Alms1 
localizes at the base of cilia in hypothalamic neurons, which are implicated in 
the control of satiety. Alms1 is lost from this location in foz/foz mice, 
coinciding with a strong postnatal reduction (∼70%) in neurons displaying cilia 
marked with adenylyl cyclase 3 (AC3), a signaling protein implicated in obesity. 
Notably, the reduction in AC3-bearing cilia parallels the decrease in cilia 
containing two appetite-regulating proteins, Mchr1 and Sstr3, as well as another 
established Arl13b ciliary marker, consistent with progressive loss of cilia 
during development. Together, our results suggest that Alms1 maintains the 
function of neuronal cilia implicated in weight regulation by influencing the 
maintenance and/or stability of the organelle. Given that Mchr1 and Sstr3 
localization to remaining cilia is maintained in foz/foz animals but known to be 
lost from BBS knockout mice, our findings suggest different molecular etiologies 
for the satiety defects associated with the Alström syndrome and BBS 
ciliopathies.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/dneu.22031
PMID: 22581473 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2012 Sep;102(3):400-6. doi:
10.1016/j.pbb.2012.06.010.  Epub 2012 Jun 15.

Melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCH1-R) antagonism: reduced appetite 
for calories and suppression of addictive-like behaviors.

Karlsson C(1), Zook M, Ciccocioppo R, Gehlert DR, Thorsell A, Heilig M, 
Cippitelli A.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Clinical and Translational Studies, National Institute on 
Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism-NIAAA, National Institutes of Health-NIH, Bethesda, 
MD, USA.

RATIONALE: The hypothalamic neuropeptide melanin-concentrating hormone and its 
MCH1 receptor have been implicated in regulation of feeding and energy 
homeostasis, as well as modulation of reward-related behaviors. Here, we 
examined whether the MCH system plays a role both in caloric and motivational 
aspects of sugar intake.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The non-peptide MCH1-R antagonist GW803430 (3, 10, 30 
mg/kg, i.p.) was first tested on self-administration under a fixed ratio 
schedule of reinforcement of both a caloric (10% w/v sucrose) and a non-caloric 
(0.06% w/v saccharin) sweet solution. GW803430 was then tested for its ability 
to alter motivational properties and seeking of sucrose. Lastly, the drug was 
tested to concurrently examine its effects on the escalated consumption of both 
sugar and food in animals following intermittent sugar access.
RESULTS: The MCH1-R antagonist reduced sucrose- but not saccharin-reinforced 
lever pressing, likely reflecting a decreased appetite for calories in 
GW803430-treated rats. GW803430 reduced sucrose self-administration under a 
progressive ratio schedule, and suppressed cue-induced reinstatement of sucrose 
seeking, suggesting effects on rewarding properties of sucrose. GW803430 
attenuated food intake in rats on intermittent access to sucrose at all doses 
examined (3, 10, 30 mg/kg), while reduction of sugar intake was weaker in 
magnitude.
CONCLUSION: Together, these observations support an involvement of the MCH 
system in regulation of energy balance as well as mediation of sucrose reward. 
MCH may be an important regulator of sugar intake by acting on both caloric and 
rewarding components.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pbb.2012.06.010
PMID: 22705492 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


274. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e41914. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0041914. Epub 2012 Jul
27.

Reduced intestinal tumorigenesis in APCmin mice lacking melanin-concentrating 
hormone.

Nagel JM(1), Geiger BM, Karagiannis AK, Gras-Miralles B, Horst D, Najarian RM, 
Ziogas DC, Chen X, Kokkotou E.

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is an evolutionary conserved 
hypothalamic neuropeptide that in mammals primarily regulates appetite and 
energy balance. We have recently identified a novel role for MCH in intestinal 
inflammation by demonstrating attenuated experimental colitis in MCH deficient 
mice or wild type mice treated with an anti-MCH antibody. Therefore, targeting 
MCH has been proposed for the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease. Given the 
link between chronic intestinal inflammation and colorectal cancer, in the 
present study we sought to investigate whether blocking MCH might have effects 
on intestinal tumorigenesis that are independent of inflammation.
METHODOLOGY: Tumor development was evaluated in MCH-deficient mice crossed to 
the APCmin mice which develop spontaneously intestinal adenomas. A different 
cohort of MCH-/- and MCH+/+ mice in the APCmin background was treated with 
dextran sodium sulphate (DSS) to induce inflammation-dependent colorectal 
tumors. In Caco2 human colorectal adenocarcinoma cells, the role of MCH on cell 
survival, proliferation and apoptosis was investigated.
RESULTS: APCmin mice lacking MCH developed fewer, smaller and less dysplastic 
tumors in the intestine and colon which at the molecular level are characterized 
by attenuated activation of the wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway and increased 
apoptotic indices. Form a mechanistic point of view, MCH increased the survival 
of colonic adenocarcinoma Caco2 cells via inhibiting apoptosis, consistent with 
the mouse studies.
CONCLUSION: In addition to modulating inflammation, MCH was found to promote 
intestinal tumorigenesis at least in part by inhibiting epithelial cell 
apoptosis. Thereby, blocking MCH as a therapeutic approach is expected to 
decrease the risk for colorectal cancer.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0041914
PMCID: PMC3407051
PMID: 22848656 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


275. Appl Radiat Isot. 2012 Oct;70(10):2287-94. doi:
10.1016/j.apradiso.2012.07.010.  Epub 2012 Jul 20.

Radiosynthesis of [11C]SNAP-7941--the first PET-tracer for the melanin 
concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1).

Philippe C(1), Schirmer E, Mitterhauser M, Shanab K, Lanzenberger R, Karanikas 
G, Spreitzer H, Viernstein H, Wadsak W.

Author information:
(1)Radiochemistry and Biomarker Development Unit, Department of Nuclear 
Medicine, Medical University of Vienna, A-1090 Vienna, Austria.

The melanin concentrating hormone (MCH) system is a new target to treat human 
disorders. Our aim was the preparation of the first PET-tracer for the MCHR1. 
[(11)C]SNAP-7941 is a carbon-11 labeled analog of the published MCHR1 antagonist 
SNAP-7941. The optimum reaction conditions were 2 min reaction time, ≤25°C 
reaction temperature, and 2 mg/mL precursor (SNAP-acid) in acetonitrile, using 
[(11)C]CH(3)OTf as methylation agent. [(11)C]SNAP-7941 was prepared in a 
reliable and feasible manner with high radiochemical yields (2.9±1.6 GBq; 
11.5±6.4% EOB, n=15).

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.apradiso.2012.07.010
PMCID: PMC3439630
PMID: 22858577 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2012 Oct 1;179(1):78-87. doi:
10.1016/j.ygcen.2012.07.023.  Epub 2012 Aug 3.

Identification of mRNAs coding for mammalian-type melanin-concentrating hormone 
and its receptors in the scalloped hammerhead shark Sphyrna lewini.

Mizusawa K(1), Amiya N, Yamaguchi Y, Takabe S, Amano M, Breves JP, Fox BK, Grau 
EG, Hyodo S, Takahashi A.

Author information:
(1)School of Marine Biosciences, Kitasato University, 1-15-1 Kitasato, 
Sagamihara, Kanagawa 252-0373, Japan. mizusawa@kitasato-u.ac.jp

Erratum in
    Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2014 May 15;201:107.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a neuromodulator, synthesized in the 
hypothalamus, that regulates both appetite and energy homeostasis in mammals. 
MCH was initially identified in teleost fishes as a pituitary gland hormone that 
induced melanin aggregation in chromatophores in the skin; however, this 
function of MCH has not been observed in other vertebrates. Recent studies 
suggest that MCH is involved in teleost feeding behavior, spurring the 
hypothesis that the original function of MCH in early vertebrates was appetite 
regulation. The present study reports the results of cDNAs cloning encoding 
preproMCH and two MCH receptors from an elasmobranch fish, Sphyrna lewini, a 
member of Chondrichthyes, the earliest diverged class in gnathostomes. The 
putative MCH peptide is composed of 19 amino acids, similar in length to the 
mammalian MCH. Reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction revealed that MCH 
is expressed in the hypothalamus in S. lewini MCH cell bodies and fibers were 
identified by immunochemistry in the hypothalamus, but not in the pituitary 
gland, suggesting that MCH is not released via the pituitary gland into general 
circulation. MCH receptor genes mch-r1 and mch-r2 were expressed in the S. 
lewini hypothalamus, but were not found in the skin. These results indicate that 
MCH does not have a peripheral function, such as a melanin-concentrating effect, 
in the skin of S. lewini hypothalamic MCH mRNA levels were not affected by 
fasting, suggesting that feeding conditions might not affect the expression of 
MCH in the hypothalamus.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2012.07.023
PMID: 22884735 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Bioorg Med Chem. 2012 Oct 1;20(19):5936-40. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2012.07.051.
Epub  2012 Aug 7.

[¹⁸F]FE@SNAP-A new PET tracer for the melanin concentrating hormone receptor 1 
(MCHR1): microfluidic and vessel-based approaches.

Philippe C(1), Ungersboeck J, Schirmer E, Zdravkovic M, Nics L, Zeilinger M, 
Shanab K, Lanzenberger R, Karanikas G, Spreitzer H, Viernstein H, Mitterhauser 
M, Wadsak W.

Author information:
(1)Radiochemistry and Biomarker Development Unit, Department of Nuclear 
Medicine, Medical University of Vienna, Waehringer Guertel 18-20, Vienna 1090, 
Austria.

Changes in the expression of the melanin concentrating hormone receptor 1 
(MCHR1) are involved in a variety of pathologies, especially obesity and anxiety 
disorders. To monitor these pathologies in-vivo positron emission tomography 
(PET) is a suitable method. After the successful radiosynthesis of 
[(11)C]SNAP-7941-the first PET-Tracer for the MCHR1, we aimed to synthesize its 
[(18)F]fluoroethylated analogue: [(18)F]FE@SNAP. Therefore, microfluidic and 
vessel-based approaches were tested. [(18)F]fluoroethylation was conducted via 
various [(18)F]fluoroalkylated synthons and direct [(18)F]fluorination. Only the 
direct [(18)F]fluorination of a tosylated precursor using a flow-through 
microreactor was successful, affording [(18)F]FE@SNAP in 44.3 ± 2.6%.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmc.2012.07.051
PMCID: PMC3460236
PMID: 22921745 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Med Chem. 2013 Feb;9(1):22-31. doi: 10.2174/157340613804488305.

Identification of structural and electronic features for a series of MCH1R 
antagonists.

Silva DC(1), Andricopulo AD, de Lima EF, Honório KM.

Author information:
(1)Centro de Ciências Naturais e Humanas, Universidade Federal do ABC, Santo 
André, Brazil.

MCH1R antagonists have been used to treat several diseases, such as obesity, 
depression and anxiety. In this study, we have performed several 
pharmacophore-based CoMFA studies for a series of 2,4,6 substituted quinolines 
as potent antagonists of MCH1R. Significant statistical results were obtained 
(q2 = 0.78, r2 = 0.99), indicating the high internal consistency of the 3D model 
generated, as well as its predictive power for untested compounds. The 3D model 
was externally validated employing a test set and the predicted biological 
values showed good agreement with experimental results. Important insights on 
the molecular interactions between the studied ligands and the MCH1R receptor, 
inferred from the 3D contour maps, were obtained and can be useful for the 
design of new structurally related analogs with improved binding affinity.

DOI: 10.2174/157340613804488305
PMID: 22946526 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2012 Oct 1;22(19):6039-47. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2012.08.025. Epub 2012 Aug 19.

Melanin concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1) antagonists-Still a viable 
approach for obesity treatment?

Högberg T(1), Frimurer TM, Sasmal PK.

Author information:
(1)LEO Pharma, Chemical Research, Industriparken 55, DK-2750 Ballerup, Denmark. 
thomas.hogberg@leo-pharma.com

Obesity is a global epidemic associated with multiple severe diseases. Several 
pharmacotherapies have been investigated including the melanin concentrating 
hormone (MCH) and its receptor 1. The development of MCHR1 antagonists are 
described with a specific perspective on different chemotypes investigated in 
efforts to overcome hERG liabilities while having orally active, potent and 
selective compounds with sufficient brain penetration. A chemometric comparison 
of ∼2000 diverse MCHR1 and ∼1000 diverse hERG ligands underline the structural 
similarities. A binding pocket analysis of a MCHR1 model and recent X-ray 
structures of GPCRs invoked in selectivity issues indicate a way to support 
future drug design.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2012.08.025
PMID: 22954736 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Endocrinology. 2012 Dec;153(12):6145-54. doi: 10.1210/en.2011-1435. Epub
2012  Sep 28.

Disruption of the melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCH1R) affects 
thyroid function.

Chung S(1), Liao XH, Di Cosmo C, Van Sande J, Wang Z, Refetoff S, Civelli O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 
92697, USA.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a peptide produced in the hypothalamus 
and the zona incerta that acts on one receptor, MCH receptor 1 (MCH1R), in 
rodents. The MCH system has been implicated in the regulation of several 
centrally directed physiological responses, including the 
hypothalamus-pituitary-thyroid axis. Yet a possible direct effect of the MCH 
system on thyroid function has not been explored in detail. We now show that 
MCH1R mRNA is expressed in thyroid follicular cells and that mice lacking MCH1R 
[MCH1R-knockout (KO)] exhibit reduced circulating iodothyronine (T(4), free 
T(4), T(3), and rT(3)) levels and high TRH and TSH when compared with wild-type 
(WT) mice. Because the TSH of MCH1R-KO mice displays a normal bioactivity, we 
hypothesize that their hypothyroidism may be caused by defective thyroid 
function. Yet expression levels of the genes important for thyroid hormones 
synthesis or secretion are not different between the MCH1R-KO and WT mice. 
However, the average thyroid follicle size of the MCH1R-KO mice is larger than 
that of WT mice and contained more free and total T(4) and T(3) than the WT 
glands, suggesting that they are sequestered in the glands. Indeed, when 
challenged with TSH, the thyroids of MCH1R-KO mice secrete lower amounts of 
T(4). Similarly, secretion of iodothyronines in the plasma upon (125)I 
administration is significantly reduced in MCH1R-KO mice. Therefore, the absence 
of MCH1R affects thyroid function by disrupting thyroid hormone secretion. To 
our knowledge, this study is the first to link the activity of the MCH system to 
the thyroid function.

DOI: 10.1210/en.2011-1435
PMCID: PMC3512057
PMID: 23024261 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


281. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e46304. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046304. Epub 2012 Sep
27.

Heteromerization of ciliary G protein-coupled receptors in the mouse brain.

Green JA(1), Gu C, Mykytyn K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, The Ohio State University, 
Columbus, Ohio, United States of America.

Nearly every cell type in the mammalian body projects from its cell surface a 
primary cilium that provides important sensory and signaling functions. Defects 
in the formation or function of primary cilia have been implicated in the 
pathogenesis of many human developmental disorders and diseases, collectively 
termed ciliopathies. Most neurons in the brain possess cilia that are enriched 
for signaling proteins such as G protein-coupled receptors and adenylyl cyclase 
type 3, suggesting neuronal cilia sense neuromodulators in the brain and 
contribute to non-synaptic signaling. Indeed, disruption of neuronal cilia or 
loss of neuronal ciliary signaling proteins is associated with obesity and 
learning and memory deficits. As the functions of primary cilia are defined by 
the signaling proteins that localize to the ciliary compartment, identifying the 
complement of signaling proteins in cilia can provide important insights into 
their physiological roles. Here we report for the first time that different 
GPCRs can colocalize within the same cilium. Specifically, we found the ciliary 
GPCRs, melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (Mchr1) and somatostatin 
receptor 3 (Sstr3) colocalizing within cilia in multiple mouse brain regions. In 
addition, we have evidence suggesting Mchr1 and Sstr3 form heteromers. As GPCR 
heteromerization can affect ligand binding properties as well as downstream 
signaling, our findings add an additional layer of complexity to neuronal 
ciliary signaling.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046304
PMCID: PMC3459911
PMID: 23029470 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


282. Infect Immun. 2013 Jan;81(1):166-72. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00572-12. Epub 2012
Oct  31.

Increased susceptibility of melanin-concentrating hormone-deficient mice to 
infection with Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium.

Karagiannis AK(1), Ziogas DC, Gras-Miralles B, Geiger BM, Nagel J, Trebicka E, 
Najarian R, Cherayil BJ, Kokkotou E.

Author information:
(1)Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) was initially identified in mammals as a 
hypothalamic neuropeptide regulating appetite and energy balance. However, the 
wide distribution of MCH receptors in peripheral tissues suggests additional 
functions for MCH which remain largely unknown. We have previously reported that 
mice lacking MCH develop attenuated intestinal inflammation when exposed to 
Clostridium difficile toxin A. To further characterize the role of MCH in host 
defense mechanisms against intestinal pathogens, Salmonella enterocolitis (using 
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium) was induced in MCH-deficient mice and 
their wild-type littermates. In the absence of MCH, infected mice had increased 
mortality associated with higher bacterial loads in blood, liver, and spleen. 
Moreover, the knockout mice developed more-severe intestinal inflammation, based 
on epithelial damage, immune cell infiltrates, and local and systemic cytokine 
levels. Paradoxically, these enhanced inflammatory responses in the MCH knockout 
mice were associated with disproportionally lower levels of macrophages 
infiltrating the intestine. Hence, we investigated potential direct effects of 
MCH on monocyte/macrophage functions critical for defense against intestinal 
pathogens. Using RAW 264.7 mouse monocytic cells, which express endogenous MCH 
receptor, we found that treatment with MCH enhanced the phagocytic capacity of 
these cells. Taken together, these findings reveal a previously unappreciated 
role for MCH in host-bacterial interactions.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00572-12
PMCID: PMC3536128
PMID: 23115043 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2012 Nov 26;3:147. doi:
10.3389/fendo.2012.00147.  eCollection 2012.

Mutation of Phe318 within the NPxxY(x)(5,6)F motif in melanin-concentrating 
hormone receptor 1 results in an efficient signaling activity.

Hamamoto A(1), Horikawa M, Saho T, Saito Y.

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Integrated Arts and Sciences, Hiroshima University 
Hiroshima, Japan.

Melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1) is a G-protein-coupled receptor 
(GPCR) that plays an important role in feeding by coupling to Gα(q)- and 
Gα(i)-mediated signal transduction pathways. To interrogate the molecular basis 
for MCHR1 activation, we analyzed the effect of a series of site-directed 
mutations on rat MCHR1 function. In the highly conserved NPxxY(x)(5,6)F domain 
of GPCRs, the phenylalanine residue is involved in structural constraints; 
replacement with alanine generally leads to impaired/lost GPCR function. 
However, Phe-to-Ala (F318A) mutation in MCHR1 had no significant effect on the 
level of cell surface expression and receptor signaling. By analyzing a further 
series of mutants, we found that Phe-to-Lys substitution (F318K) caused the most 
significant reduction in the EC(50) value of MCH for calcium mobilization 
without affecting receptor expression at the cell surface. Interestingly, 
GTPγS-binding, which monitors Gα(i) activation, was not modulated by F318K. Our 
results, combined with computer modeling, provide new insight into the role of 
Phe in the NPxxY(x)(5,6)F motif as a structurally critical site for receptor 
dynamics and a determinant of Gα protein interaction.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2012.00147
PMCID: PMC3515998
PMID: 23233849


284. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2012 Dec 21;3:160. doi:
10.3389/fendo.2012.00160.  eCollection 2012.

Peripheral injections of melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 antagonist 
S38151 decrease food intake and body weight in rodent obesity models.

Della-Zuana O(1), Audinot V, Levenez V, Ktorza A, Presse F, Nahon JL, Boutin JA.

Author information:
(1)Maladies Métaboliques, Institut de Recherches SERVIER Suresnes, France.

The compound S38151 is a nanomolar antagonist that acts at the 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCH(1)). S38151 is more stable than 
its purely peptide counterpart, essentially because of the blockade of its 
N-terminus. Therefore, its action on various models of obesity was studied. 
Acute intra-cerebroventricular (i.c.v.) administration of S38151 in wild-type 
rats counteracted the effect of the stable precursor of melanin-concentrating 
hormone (MCH), NEI-MCH, in a dose-dependent manner (from 0.5 to 50 nmol/kg). In 
genetically obese Zucker fa/fa rats, daily i.c.v. administration of S38151 
induced dose-dependent (5, 10, and 20 nmol/kg) inhibition of food intake, water 
intake, and body weight gain, as well as increased motility (maximal effect 
observed at 20 nmol/kg). In Zucker fa/fa rats, intraperitoneal injection of 
S38151 (30 mg/kg) induced complete inhibition of food consumption within 1 h. 
Daily intraperitoneal injection of S38151 (10 and 30 mg/kg) into genetically 
obese ob/ob mice or diet-induced obese mice is able to limit body weight gain. 
Furthermore, S38151 administration (10 and 30 mg/kg) does not affect food 
intake, water intake, or body weight gain in MCHR1-deleted mice, demonstrating 
that its effects are linked to its interaction with MCH(1). These results 
validate MCH(1) as a target of interest in obesity. S38151 cannot progress to 
the clinical phase because it is still too poorly stable in vivo.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2012.00160
PMCID: PMC3527734
PMID: 23267345


285. Acta Derm Venereol. 2013 Jul 6;93(4):400-5. doi: 10.2340/00015555-1524.

Gene expression analysis of the corticotrophin-releasing 
hormone-proopiomelanocortin system in psoriasis skin biopsies.

Loite U(1), Kingo K, Reimann E, Reemann P, Vasar E, Silm H, Kõks S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. 
Ulvi.loite@gmail.com

The corticotrophin-releasing hormone-proopiomelanocortin (CRH-POMC) system in 
the skin coordinates pigmentation and the immune response. The aim of this study 
was to evaluate the regulatory role of the neuroendocrine system in the 
pathogenesis of psoriasis. Using quantitative real-time-PCR, mRNA expression 
levels of 15 genes related to the CRH-POMC system were measured in punch 
biopsies from lesional and non-lesional skin of patients with psoriasis and from 
skin of healthy control subjects. Statistically significant up-regulation of 
POMC, CRH receptor type 1, melanin-concentrating hormone receptor (MCHR1) and 
melanocortin receptors 2, 3 and 4 mRNA expression in lesional and in 
non-lesional skin compared with healthy control samples were established. 
Tyrosinase (TYR), T(Y)RP-1 and ASIP genes were statistically significantly 
down-regulated in lesional and non-lesional skin of psoriasis samples compared 
with healthy subjects. The up-regulation of POMC, melanocortin receptors, CRH 
receptor type 1 and MCHR1 in the lesional and non-lesional skin of psoriasis 
patients supports the importance of the local CRH-POMC system in the 
pathogenesis of psoriasis.

DOI: 10.2340/00015555-1524
PMID: 23303587 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Cilia. 2012 Nov 1;1(1):21. doi: 10.1186/2046-2530-1-21.

Tubby is required for trafficking G protein-coupled receptors to neuronal cilia.

Sun X(1), Haley J, Bulgakov OV, Cai X, McGinnis J, Li T.

Author information:
(1)Neurobiology Neurodegeneration and Repair Laboratory (N-NRL), National Eye 
Institute, MSC0610, 6 Center Drive, Bethesda, MD, 20892, USA. 
tiansen.li@nih.gov.

BACKGROUND: Tubby is the founding member of the tubby-like family of proteins. 
The naturally occurring tubby mutation in mice causes retinitis pigmentosa, 
hearing loss and obesity. Tubby has been proposed to function as an accessory 
factor in ciliary trafficking. We directly examined a role for tubby in ciliary 
trafficking in vivo.
METHODS: We used immunofluoresence labeling to examine the subcellular 
localization of rhodopsin, somatostatin receptor 3 (SSTR3) and melanin 
concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1), all of which are G protein-coupled 
receptors (GPCR), in the retina and brain of wild type (WT) and tubby mutant 
mice.
RESULTS: In tubby mouse retina, rhodopsin is not fully transported across the 
connecting cilia to the outer segments with ensuing photoreceptor degeneration. 
In the tubby mouse brain, SSTR3 and MCHR1 fail to localize at the neuronal 
primary cilia in regions where these receptors play critical roles in neural 
signaling. The tubby mutant does not manifest a generalized defect in 
ciliogenesis or protein trafficking.
CONCLUSIONS: Tubby plays a critical role in trafficking select GPCRs to the 
cilia. This role is reminiscent of tubby-like proteins 1 and 3, which have been 
proposed to facilitate trafficking of rhodopsin and select GPCRs in 
photoreceptors and the developing neural tube, respectively. Thus tubby-like 
proteins may be generally involved in transciliary trafficking of GPCRs.

DOI: 10.1186/2046-2530-1-21
PMCID: PMC3599646
PMID: 23351594


287. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2013 Mar 15;23(6):1736-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bmcl.2013.01.053.  Epub 2013 Jan 24.

Synthesis and SAR study of pyrrolo[3,4-b]pyridin-7(6H)-one derivatives as 
melanin concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCH-R1) antagonists.

Lim CJ(1), Kim JY, Lee BH, Oh KS, Yi KY.

Author information:
(1)Division of Drug Discovery Research, Korea Research Institute of Chemical 
Technology, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-343, Republic of Korea.

The discovery and optimization of novel pyrrolo[3,4-b]pyridin-7(6H)-one MCH-R1 
antagonists are described. A systematic SAR study probing the effects of aryl-, 
benzyl- and arylthio-substituents at the 2-position of the 
pyrrolo[3,4-b]pyridin-7(6H)-ones led to identification of the 
2-[(4-fluorophenyl)thio] derivative 7b as a highly potent MCH-R1 antagonist. 
This compound also has favorable pharmacokinetic properties along with a high 
metabolic stability and a minimal impact on CYP isoforms and hERG.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2013.01.053
PMID: 23411080 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


288. J Neuroendocrinol. 2013 Jun;25(6):570-9. doi: 10.1111/jne.12032.

Oestradiol decreases melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) and MCH receptor 
expression in the hypothalamus of female rats.

Santollo J(1), Eckel LA.

Author information:
(1)Program in Neuroscience, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL, USA. 
jsantoll@buffalo.edu

Previous studies have shown that oestradiol (E₂) decreases the orexigenic effect 
of melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH). In the present study, we examined 
whether this action of E₂ is mediated by its ability to decrease the expression 
of MCH or its receptor (MCHR1). Using immunocytochemistry and western blotting, 
we examined whether E₂ decreases MCH-immunoreactive neurones or MCHR1 protein 
content in the hypothalamus of female rats. We found that both MCH and MCHR1 
protein expression was decreased by acute E₂ treatment in ovariectomised rats, 
and by the peri-ovulatory increase in circulating E₂ in pro-oestrous rats, 
relative to rats at other cycle stages. To determine whether these changes in 
MCH/MCHR1 protein expression may be mediated by E₂'s ability to directly 
regulate the transcription of MCH and MCHR1 genes, the effect of E₂ treatment on 
MCH and MCHR1 mRNA expression in a neuronal hypothalamic cell line was examined 
using real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction. We also 
determined whether MCH and oestrogen receptor (ER)α are co-expressed in the 
hypothalamus of female rats. E₂ treatment did not decrease MCH or MCHR1 mRNA 
expression in vitro, and no hypothalamic neurones were identified that 
co-expressed MCH and ERα. We conclude that E₂-dependent decreases in 
hypothalamic MCH/MCHR1 protein expression mediate the ability of E₂ to decrease 
MCH-induced feeding. The current findings suggest, however, that E₂ exerts these 
actions indirectly, most likely though interactions with other neuronal systems 
that provide afferent input to MCH and MCHR1 neurones.

© 2013 British Society for Neuroendocrinology.

DOI: 10.1111/jne.12032
PMCID: PMC3668853
PMID: 23414264 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2013 Sep;16(8):1767-80. doi: 
10.1017/S1461145713000072. Epub 2013 Mar 1.

Role of melanin-concentrating hormone in the nucleus accumbens shell in rats 
behaviourally sensitized to methamphetamine.

Sun LL(1), Zhang Y, Liu JF, Wang J, Zhu WL, Zhao LY, Xue YX, Lu L, Shi J.

Author information:
(1)National Institute on Drug Dependence, Peking University, B38 Xue Yuan Road, 
Haidian, Beijing, China.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a neuropeptide and its receptor is 
extensively expressed throughout the brain. MCH has been suggested to regulate 
the rewarding and reinforcing effects of psychostimulants by potentiating the 
dopaminergic system within the midbrain. Moreover, MCH and its receptor can 
regulate ERK activity. The present study investigated the role of MCH in the 
nucleus accumbens (NAc) in rats behaviourally sensitized to methamphetamine 
(Meth). We found that the development of Meth-induced locomotor sensitization 
was attenuated by MCH infused into the NAc shell but not core. Moreover, the 
elevation of ERK phosphorylation in the NAc shell induced by Meth was inhibited 
by locally infused MCH. Infusion of the MCH receptor 1 (MCHR1) antagonist SNAP 
94847 into the NAc shell but not core augmented the initiation of locomotor 
sensitization and amplitude of elevated phosphorylated ERK levels induced by 
Meth. The expression of Meth-induced locomotor sensitization and ERK alterations 
after 1 wk withdrawal were not affected by either MCH or SNAP 94847 infused into 
the NAc shell or core. These results indicate that MCH in the NAc shell plays a 
critical role in the development but not expression of Meth-induced locomotor 
sensitization in rats, which might be mediated by the ERK signalling pathway. 
Our study suggests that MCH might be a potential target for the treatment of 
Meth addiction.

DOI: 10.1017/S1461145713000072
PMID: 23449013 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2013 Jul 1;188:159-65. doi:
10.1016/j.ygcen.2013.02.020.  Epub 2013 Mar 4.

Characterization of ciliary targeting sequence of rat melanin-concentrating 
hormone receptor 1.

Nagata A(1), Hamamoto A, Horikawa M, Yoshimura K, Takeda S, Saito Y.

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Integrated Arts and Sciences, Hiroshima University, 
Kagamiyama, Hiroshima 739-8521, Japan.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is the natural peptide ligand for MCHR1 and 
MCHR2, which belong to the G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) superfamily. The 
MCH-MCHR1 system is involved in the regulation of feeding, energy homeostasis 
and emotional processing in rodents. Recently, MCHR1 expression was discovered 
in neuronal immotile primary cilia of the central nervous system in mice. The 
cilium has an important chemosensory function in many types of cell and ciliary 
dysfunction is associated with cliopathies such as polycystic kidney disease, 
retinal dystrophy, and obesity. The targeting sequence of ciliary membrane 
proteins is thought to be unique. Although these sequences have been predicted 
in the cytoplasmic third loop and/or C-terminus of GPCRs, little is known about 
the characteristics of MCHR1. We thus explored the molecular mechanisms of MCHR1 
targeting by transiently expressing a series of MCHR1 mutants into ciliated 
hRPE1 cells and evaluated the effects of these mutations on the ciliary 
localization of the heterologous receptor. This approach demonstrated that an 
Ala-to-Gly mutation (A242G) within the third intracellular loop induced a 
significant reduction in ciliary localization of the receptor without affecting 
the ciliogenesis. In contrast, no C-terminal truncation mutant had any effect on 
ciliary localization or cilia length. This study provides a potential molecular 
link between defective cilia and clinical manifestations such as obesity.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2013.02.020
PMID: 23467069 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Sleep Med Rev. 2013 Aug;17(4):293-8. doi: 10.1016/j.smrv.2012.10.002. Epub
2013  Mar 9.

Melanin-concentrating hormone control of sleep-wake behavior.

Monti JM(1), Torterolo P, Lagos P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, School of Medicine Clinics 
Hospital, Montevideo 11600, Uruguay. jmonti@mednet.org.uy

The melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a 19 aminoacid peptide found in 
mammals predominantly in neurons located in the lateral hypothalamus and 
incerto-hypothalamic area. The biological function of MCH is mediated by two 
G-protein-coupled receptors known as MCHR1 and MCHR2, although the latter is 
expressed only in carnivores, primates and man. The MCHR1 couples to Gi, Gq and 
Go proteins, with Gi leading to the inhibition of both excitatory and inhibitory 
synaptic events. Within the central nervous system (CNS) MCH participates in a 
number of functions including sleep-wake behavior. In this respect, MCHergic 
neurons project widely throughout the CNS to brain regions involved in the 
regulation of behavioral states. MCHergic neurons are silent during wakefulness 
(W), increase their firing during slow wave sleep (SWS) and still more during 
REM sleep (REMS). Studies in knockout mice for MCH (MCH(-/-)) have shown a 
reduction in SWS and an increase of W during the light and the dark phase of the 
light-dark cycle. Moreover, in response to food deprivation a marked reduction 
in REMS time was observed in these animals. Conflicting effects on sleep 
variables have been reported in MCHR1(-/-) mice by different authors. The i.c.v. 
administration of MCH increases REMS and SWS in the rat. In addition, an 
enhancement of REMS has been described following the microinjection of the 
neuropeptide into the nucleus pontis oralis of the cat, while its infusion into 
the dorsal raphe nucleus (DR) and the basal forebrain (horizontal limb of the 
diagonal band of Broca) is followed by an increase of REMS and a reduction of W 
in the rat. Immunoneutralization of MCH in the DR augmented W and suppressed 
REMS in the rat, as did the s.c. injection of selective MCHR1 antagonists. The 
robust REMS-inducing effect of MCH is likely related to the deactivation of 
monoaminergic, orexinergic, glutamatergic, cholinergic (W-on) and GABAergic 
(REM-off) neurons involved in the generation of W and the inhibition of REMS. On 
the basis of preclinical studies, it can be proposed that selective MCHR1 
receptor agonists could constitute potential therapeutic modalities in the 
arsenal of insomnia pharmacotherapy. Due to the lack of adequate animal models, 
the role of the MCHR2 on sleep is still unknown.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.smrv.2012.10.002
PMID: 23477948 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2014 Mar;22(3):681-90. doi: 10.1002/oby.20418. Epub
 2013 Dec 2.

Effects of a specific MCHR1 antagonist (GW803430) on energy budget and glucose 
metabolism in diet-induced obese mice.

Zhang LN(1), Sinclair R, Selman C, Mitchell S, Morgan D, Clapham JC, Speakman 
JR.

Author information:
(1)Integrative Physiology, Institute of Biological Sciences, University of 
Aberdeen, Aberdeen, Scotland, UK.

OBJECTIVE: The melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a centrally acting peptide 
implicated in the regulation of energy homeostasis and body weight, although its 
role in glucose homeostasis is uncertain. Our objective was to determine effects 
of MCHR1 antagonism on energy budgets and glucose homeostasis in mice.
METHODS: Effects of chronic oral administration of a specific MCHR1 antagonist 
(GW803430) on energy budgets and glucose homeostasis in diet-induced obese (DIO) 
C57BL/6J mice were examined.
RESULTS: Oral administration of GW803430 for 30 days reduced food intake, body 
weight, and body fat. Circulating leptin and triglycerides were reduced but 
insulin and nonesterified fatty acids were unaffected. Despite weight loss there 
was no improvement in glucose homeostasis (insulin levels and intraperitoneal 
glucose tolerance tests). On day 4-6, mice receiving MCHR1 antagonist exhibited 
decreased metabolisable energy intake and increased daily energy expenditure. 
However these effects had disappeared by day 22-24. Physical activity during the 
dark phase was increased by MCHR1 antagonist treatment throughout the 30-day 
treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: GW803430 produced a persistent anti-obesity effect due to both a 
decrease in energy intake and an increase in energy expenditure via physical 
activity but did not improve glucose homeostasis.

Copyright © 2013 The Obesity Society.

DOI: 10.1002/oby.20418
PMID: 23512845 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2013 May 15;304(10):G876-84. doi: 
10.1152/ajpgi.00305.2012. Epub 2013 Mar 28.

Anti-melanin-concentrating hormone treatment attenuates chronic experimental 
colitis and fibrosis.

Ziogas DC(1), Gras-Miralles B, Mustafa S, Geiger BM, Najarian RM, Nagel JM, 
Flier SN, Popov Y, Tseng YH, Kokkotou E.

Author information:
(1)Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Dana 501, 330 Brookline Ave., Boston, 
MA 02215, USA.

Fibrosis represents a major complication of several chronic diseases, including 
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Treatment of IBD remains a clinical challenge 
despite several recent therapeutic advances. Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) 
is a hypothalamic neuropeptide shown to regulate appetite and energy balance. 
However, accumulating evidence suggests that MCH has additional biological 
effects, including modulation of inflammation. In the present study, we examined 
the efficacy of an MCH-blocking antibody in treating established, dextran sodium 
sulfate-induced experimental colitis. Histological and molecular analysis of 
mouse tissues revealed that mice receiving anti-MCH had accelerated mucosal 
restitution and lower colonic expression of several proinflammatory cytokines, 
as well as fibrogenic genes, including COL1A1. In parallel, they spared collagen 
deposits seen in the untreated mice, suggesting attenuated fibrosis. These 
findings raised the possibility of perhaps direct effects of MCH on 
myofibroblasts. Indeed, in biopsies from patients with IBD, we demonstrate 
expression of the MCH receptor MCHR1 in α-smooth muscle actin(+) subepithelial 
cells. CCD-18Co cells, a primary human colonic myofibroblast cell line, were 
also positive for MCHR1. In these cells, MCH acted as a profibrotic modulator by 
potentiating the effects of IGF-1 and TGF-β on proliferation and collagen 
production. Thus, by virtue of combined anti-inflammatory and anti-fibrotic 
effects, blocking MCH might represent a compelling approach for treating IBD.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpgi.00305.2012
PMCID: PMC3652072
PMID: 23538494 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


294. J Chem Inf Model. 2013 May 24;53(5):1084-99. doi: 10.1021/ci4000882. Epub
2013  Apr 26.

Fighting obesity with a sugar-based library: discovery of novel MCH-1R 
antagonists by a new computational-VAST approach for exploration of GPCR binding 
sites.

Heifetz A(1), Barker O, Verquin G, Wimmer N, Meutermans W, Pal S, Law RJ, 
Whittaker M.

Author information:
(1)Evotec (UK), Ltd., Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxfordshire, United Kingdom. 
Alexander.Heifetz@Evotec.com

Obesity is an increasingly common disease. While antagonism of the 
melanin-concentrating hormone-1 receptor (MCH-1R) has been widely reported as a 
promising therapeutic avenue for obesity treatment, no MCH-1R antagonists have 
reached the market. Discovery and optimization of new chemical matter targeting 
MCH-1R is hindered by reduced HTS success rates and a lack of structural 
information about the MCH-1R binding site. X-ray crystallography and NMR, the 
major experimental sources of structural information, are very slow processes 
for membrane proteins and are not currently feasible for every GPCR or 
GPCR-ligand complex. This situation significantly limits the ability of these 
methods to impact the drug discovery process for GPCR targets in "real-time", 
and hence, there is an urgent need for other practical and cost-efficient 
alternatives. We present here a conceptually pioneering approach that integrates 
GPCR modeling with design, synthesis, and screening of a diverse library of 
sugar-based compounds from the VAST technology (versatile assembly on stable 
templates) to provide structural insights on the MCH-1R binding site. This 
approach creates a cost-efficient new avenue for structure-based drug discovery 
(SBDD) against GPCR targets. In our work, a primary VAST hit was used to 
construct a high-quality MCH-1R model. Following model validation, a 
structure-based virtual screen yielded a 14% hit rate and 10 novel chemotypes of 
potent MCH-1R antagonists, including EOAI3367472 (IC50 = 131 nM) and EOAI3367474 
(IC50 = 213 nM).

DOI: 10.1021/ci4000882
PMID: 23590178 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


295. J Comp Neurol. 2013 Jul 1;521(10):2208-34. doi: 10.1002/cne.23273.

Neurochemical characterization of neurons expressing melanin-concentrating 
hormone receptor 1 in the mouse hypothalamus.

Chee MJ(1), Pissios P, Maratos-Flier E.

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a hypothalamic neuropeptide that acts via 
MCH receptor 1 (MCHR1) in the mouse. It promotes positive energy balance; thus, 
mice lacking MCH or MCHR1 are lean, hyperactive, and resistant to diet-induced 
obesity. Identifying the cellular targets of MCH is an important step to 
understanding the mechanisms underlying MCH actions. We generated the Mchr1-cre 
mouse that expresses cre recombinase driven by the MCHR1 promoter and crossed it 
with a tdTomato reporter mouse. The resulting Mchr1-cre/tdTomato progeny 
expressed easily detectable tdTomato fluorescence in MCHR1 neurons, which were 
found throughout the olfactory system, striatum, and hypothalamus. To chemically 
identify MCH-targeted cell populations that play a role in energy balance, MCHR1 
hypothalamic neurons were characterized by colabeling select hypothalamic 
neuropeptides with tdTomato fluorescence. TdTomato fluorescence colocalized with 
dynorphin, oxytocin, vasopressin, enkephalin, thyrothropin-releasing hormone, 
and corticotropin-releasing factor immunoreactive cells in the paraventricular 
nucleus. In the lateral hypothalamus, neurotensin, but neither orexin nor MCH 
neurons, expressed tdTomato. In the arcuate nucleus, both Neuropeptide Y and 
proopiomelanocortin cells expressed tdTomato. We further demonstrated that some 
of these arcuate neurons were also targets of leptin action. Interestingly, 
MCHR1 was expressed in the vast majority of leptin-sensitive proopiomelanocortin 
neurons, highlighting their importance for the orexigenic actions of MCH. Taken 
together, this study supports the use of the Mchr1-cre mouse for outlining the 
neuroanatomical distribution and neurochemical phenotype of MCHR1 neurons.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/cne.23273
PMCID: PMC3633152
PMID: 23605441 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT The authors have 
no known or potential conflict of interest to disclose.


296. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2013 Apr 22;4:49. doi:
10.3389/fendo.2013.00049.  eCollection 2013.

The role of melanin-concentrating hormone and its receptors in energy 
homeostasis.

Macneil DJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of In Vitro Pharmacology, Merck Research Laboratories Kenilworth, 
NJ, USA.

Extensive studies in rodents with melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) have 
demonstrated that the neuropeptide hormone is a potent orexigen. Acutely, MCH 
causes an increase in food intake, while chronically it leads to increased 
weight gain, primarily as an increase in fat mass. Multiple knockout mice models 
have confirmed the importance of MCH in modulating energy homeostasis. Animals 
lacking MCH, MCH-containing neurons, or the MCH receptor all are resistant to 
diet-induced obesity. These genetic and pharmacologic studies have prompted a 
large effort to identify potent and selective MCH receptor antagonists, 
initially as tool compounds to probe pharmacology in models of obesity, with an 
ultimate goal to identify novel anti-obesity drugs. In animal models, MCH 
antagonists have consistently shown efficacy in reducing food intake acutely and 
inhibiting body-weight gain when given chronically. Five compounds have 
proceeded into clinical testing. Although they were reported as well-tolerated, 
none has advanced to long-term efficacy and safety studies.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2013.00049
PMCID: PMC3631741
PMID: 23626585


297. Nat Neurosci. 2013 Jul;16(7):845-7. doi: 10.1038/nn.3401. Epub 2013 May 26.

Melanin-concentrating hormone regulates beat frequency of ependymal cilia and 
ventricular volume.

Conductier G(1), Brau F, Viola A, Langlet F, Ramkumar N, Dehouck B, Lemaire T, 
Chapot R, Lucas L, Rovère C, Maitre P, Hosseiny S, Petit-Paitel A, Adamantidis 
A, Lakaye B, Risold PY, Prévot V, Meste O, Nahon JL, Guyon A.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Pharmacologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, UMR 7275 Centre National 
de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), Valbonne, France.

Ependymal cell cilia help move cerebrospinal fluid through the cerebral 
ventricles, but the regulation of their beat frequency remains unclear. Using in 
vitro, high-speed video microscopy and in vivo magnetic resonance imaging in 
mice, we found that the metabolic peptide melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) 
positively controlled cilia beat frequency, specifically in the ventral third 
ventricle, whereas a lack of MCH receptor provoked a ventricular size increase.

DOI: 10.1038/nn.3401
PMID: 23708141 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2013 Jul 15;23(14):4216-20. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2013.05.017. Epub 2013 May 15.

Potent MCH-1 receptor antagonists from cis-1,4-diaminocyclohexane-derived indane 
analogs.

Qian Y(1), Conde-Knape K, Erickson SD, Falcioni F, Gillespie P, Hakimi I, 
Mennona F, Ren Y, Salari H, So SS, Tilley JW.

Author information:
(1)Discovery Chemistry, Small Molecule Research, Pharmaceutical Research and 
Early Drug Development, Hoffmann-La Roche Inc., 340 Kingsland Street, Nutley, NJ 
07110, USA. yiminqian81@gmail.com

Benzimidazole and indane are the two key fragments in our potent and selective 
MCH-1 receptor (MCHR1) antagonists. To identify novel linkers connecting the two 
fragments, we investigated diamino-cycloalkane-derived analogs and discovered 
highly potent antagonists with cis-1,4-diaminocyclohexane as a unique spacer in 
this chemical class. Structural overlay suggested that 
cis-1-substituted-4-aminocyclohexane functions as a bioisostere of 
4-substituted-piperidine and that the active conformation adopts a U-shaped 
orientation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2013.05.017
PMID: 23743277 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Nucl Med Biol. 2013 Oct;40(7):919-25. doi: 10.1016/j.nucmedbio.2013.05.010.
Epub  2013 Jul 3.

Preclinical in vitro &in vivo evaluation of [(11)C]SNAP-7941 - the first PET 
tracer for the melanin concentrating hormone receptor 1.

Philippe C(1), Nics L, Zeilinger M, Kuntner C, Wanek T, Mairinger S, Shanab K, 
Spreitzer H, Viernstein H, Wadsak W, Mitterhauser M.

Author information:
(1)Radiochemistry and Biomarker Development Unit, Department of Nuclear 
Medicine, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria; Department of 
Pharmaceutical Technology and Biopharmaceutics, University of Vienna, Vienna, 
Austria.

INTRODUCTION: Due to its involvement in a variety of pathologies (obesity, 
diabetes, gut inflammation and depression), the melanin concentrating hormone 
receptor 1 (MCHR1) is a new target for the treatment of these lifestyle 
diseases. We previously presented the radiosynthesis of [(11)C]SNAP-7941, the 
first potential PET tracer for the MCHR1.
METHODS: We herein present its in vitro and in vivo evaluation, including 
binding affinity, plasma stability, stability against liver mircrosomes and 
carboxylesterase, lipohilicity, biodistribution, in vivo metabolism and 
small-animal PET.
RESULTS: [(11)C]SNAP-7941 evinced high stability against liver microsomes, 
carboxylesterase and in human plasma. The first small-animal PET experiments 
revealed a 5 fold increased brain uptake after Pgp/BCRP inhibition. Therefore, 
it can be assumed that [(11)C]SNAP-7941 is a Pgp/BCRP substrate. No metabolites 
were found in brain.
CONCLUSION: On the basis of these experiments with healthy rats, the suitability 
of [(11)C]SNAP-7941 for the visualisation of central and peripheral MCHR1 
remains speculative.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nucmedbio.2013.05.010
PMID: 23829932 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Molecules. 2013 Sep 30;18(10):12119-43. doi: 10.3390/molecules181012119.

Syntheses of precursors and reference compounds of the melanin-concentrating 
hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1) tracers [¹¹C]SNAP-7941 and [¹⁸F]FE@SNAP for positron 
emission tomography.

Schirmer E(1), Shanab K, Datterl B, Neudorfer C, Mitterhauser M, Wadsak W, 
Philippe C, Spreitzer H.

Author information:
(1)University of Vienna, Department of Drug and Natural Product Synthesis, 
Althanstraße 14, 1090 Vienna, Austria. eva.schirmer@univie.ac.at.

The MCH receptor has been revealed as a target of great interest in positron 
emission tomography imaging. The receptor's eponymous substrate 
melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a cyclic peptide hormone, which is 
located predominantly in the hypothalamus with a major influence on energy and 
weight regulation as well as water balance and memory. Therefore, it is thought 
to play an important role in the pathophysiology of adiposity, which is nowadays 
a big issue worldwide. Based on the selective and high-affinity MCH receptor 1 
antagonist SNAP-7941, a series of novel SNAP derivatives has been developed to 
provide different precursors and reference compounds for the radiosyntheses of 
the novel PET radiotracers [(11)C]SNAP-7941 and [(18)F]FE@SNAP. Positron 
emission tomography promotes a better understanding of physiologic parameters on 
a molecular level, thus giving a deeper insight into MCHR1 related processes as 
adiposity.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules181012119
PMCID: PMC6270061
PMID: 24084017 [Indexed for MEDLINE]301. Sci Pharm. 2013 Jul 1;81(3):625-39. doi: 10.3797/scipharm.1306-02. Print
2013  Jul-Sep.

Preparation and First Preclinical Evaluation of [(18)F]FE@SNAP: A Potential PET 
Tracer for the Melanin-Concentrating Hormone Receptor-1 (MCHR1).

Philippe C(1), Nics L, Zeilinger M, Schirmer E, Spreitzer H, Karanikas G, 
Lanzenberger R, Viernstein H, Wadsak W, Mitterhauser M.

Author information:
(1)Radiochemistry and Biomarker Development Unit, Department of Nuclear 
Medicine, Medical University of Vienna, Waehringer Guertel 18-20, 1090 Vienna, 
Austria. ; Department of Pharmaceutical Technology and Biopharmaceutics, 
University of Vienna, Althanstraße 14, 1090 Vienna, Austria.

The melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) system is a new target for the treatment 
of human disorders. Since the knowledge of the MCH system's involvement in a 
variety of pathologies (obesity, diabetes, and deregulation of metabolic 
feedback mechanism) is based on in vitro or preclinical studies, a suitable 
positron emission tomography (PET) tracer needs to be developed. We herein 
present the preparation and first preclinical evaluation of [(18)F]FE@SNAP - a 
new PET tracer for MCH receptor-1 (MCHR1). The synthesis was performed using a 
microfluidic device. Preclinical evaluation included binding affinity, plasma 
stability, plasma free fraction, stability against the cytochrome P-450 (CYP450) 
system using liver microsomes, stability against carboxyl-esterase, and methods 
to assess the penetration of the blood-brain barrier (BBB) such as logD analysis 
and immobilized artificial membrane (IAM) chromatography. Levels at 374 ± 202 
MBq [(18)F]FE@SNAP were obtained after purification. The obtained K d value of 
[(18)F]FE@SNAP was 2.9 nM. [(18)F]FE@SNAP evinced high stability against 
carboxylesterase, CYP450 enzymes, and in human plasma. LogD (3.83) and IAM 
chromatography results (Pm=0.51) were in the same range as for known 
BBB-penetrating compounds. The synthesis of [(18)F]FE@SNAP was reliable and 
successful. Due to high binding affinity and stability, [(18)F]FE@SNAP is a 
promising tracer for MCHR1.

DOI: 10.3797/scipharm.1306-02
PMCID: PMC3791928
PMID: 24106662


302. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2013 Oct 21;4:154. doi:
10.3389/fendo.2013.00154.

Regulated Control of Melanin-Concentrating Hormone Receptor 1 through 
Posttranslational Modifications.

Saito Y(1), Hamamoto A, Kobayashi Y.

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Integrated Arts and Sciences, Hiroshima University , 
Hiroshima , Japan.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a hypothalamic neuropeptide that plays an 
important role in feeding behavior. It activates two G-protein-coupled 
receptors, MCHR1 and MCHR2, of which MCHR1 is the primary regulator of food 
intake and energy homeostasis in rodents. In mammalian cells transfected with 
MCHR1, MCH is able to activate multiple signaling pathways including calcium 
mobilization, extracellular signal-regulated kinase activation, and inhibition 
of cyclic AMP generation through Gi/o- and Gq-coupled pathways. Further evidence 
suggests that MCHR1 is regulated through posttranslational modifications, which 
control its intracellular localization and provide appropriate cellular 
responses involving G-protein signaling. This review summarizes the current data 
on the control of MCHR1 function through glycosylation and phosphorylation, as 
related to cell function. Especially, a series of mutagenesis study highlights 
the importance of complete glycosylation of MCHR1 for efficient trafficking to 
the plasma membrane.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2013.00154
PMCID: PMC3800845
PMID: 24155742


303. Endocrinology. 2014 Jan;155(1):81-8. doi: 10.1210/en.2013-1738. Epub 2013
Dec  20.

Expression of melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 2 protects against 
diet-induced obesity in male mice.

Chee MJ(1), Pissios P, Prasad D, Maratos-Flier E.

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is an orexigenic neuropeptide that is a 
ligand for two subtypes of MCH receptors, MCHR1 and MCHR2. MCHR1 is universally 
expressed in mammals ranging from rodents to humans, but the expression of MCHR2 
is substantially restricted. In mammals, MCHR2 has been defined in primates as 
well as other species such as cats and dogs but is not seen in rodents. Although 
the role of MCHR1 in mediating the actions of MCH on energy balance is clearly 
defined using mouse models, the role of MCHR2 is harder to characterize because 
of its limited expression. To determine any potential role of MCHR2 in energy 
balance, we generated a transgenic MCHR1R2 mouse model, where human MCHR2 is 
coexpressed in MCHR1-expressing neurons. As shown previously, control wild-type 
mice expressing only native MCHR1 developed diet-induced obesity when fed a 
high-fat diet. In contrast, MCHR1R2 mice had lower food intake, leading to their 
resistance to diet-induced obesity. Furthermore, we showed that MCH action is 
altered in MCHR1R2 mice. MCH treatment in wild-type mice inhibited the 
activation of the immediate-early gene c-fos, and coexpression of MCHR2 reduced 
the inhibitory actions of MCHR1 on this pathway. In conclusion, we developed an 
experimental animal model that can provide insight into the action of MCHR2 in 
the central nervous system and suggest that some actions of MCHR2 oppose the 
endogenous actions of MCHR1.

DOI: 10.1210/en.2013-1738
PMCID: PMC3868808
PMID: 24169555 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


304. BMC Genomics. 2013 Nov 13;14:784. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-784.

Genome wide analysis reveals single nucleotide polymorphisms associated with 
fatness and putative novel copy number variants in three pig breeds.

Fowler KE, Pong-Wong R, Bauer J, Clemente EJ, Reitter CP, Affara NA, Waite S, 
Walling GA, Griffin DK(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biosciences, University of Kent, Canterbury, Kent CT2 7NH, UK. 
d.k.griffin@kent.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Obesity, excess fat tissue in the body, can underlie a variety of 
medical complaints including heart disease, stroke and cancer. The pig is an 
excellent model organism for the study of various human disorders, including 
obesity, as well as being the foremost agricultural species. In order to 
identify genetic variants associated with fatness, we used a selective genomic 
approach sampling DNA from animals at the extreme ends of the fat and lean 
spectrum using estimated breeding values derived from a total population size of 
over 70,000 animals. DNA from 3 breeds (Sire Line Large White, Duroc and a white 
Pietrain composite line (Titan)) was used to interrogate the Illumina Porcine 
SNP60 Genotyping Beadchip in order to identify significant associations in terms 
of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and copy number variants (CNVs).
RESULTS: By sampling animals at each end of the fat/lean EBV (estimate breeding 
value) spectrum the whole population could be assessed using less than 300 
animals, without losing statistical power. Indeed, several significant SNPs (at 
the 5% genome wide significance level) were discovered, 4 of these linked to 
genes with ontologies that had previously been correlated with fatness (NTS, 
FABP6, SST and NR3C2). Quantitative analysis of the data identified putative CNV 
regions containing genes whose ontology suggested fatness related functions 
(MCHR1, PPARα, SLC5A1 and SLC5A4).
CONCLUSIONS: Selective genotyping of EBVs at either end of the phenotypic 
spectrum proved to be a cost effective means of identifying SNPs and CNVs 
associated with fatness and with estimated major effects in a large population 
of animals.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-784
PMCID: PMC3879217
PMID: 24225222 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Chem Pharm Bull (Tokyo). 2013;61(12):1239-47. doi: 10.1248/cpb.c13-00486.

Synthesis and structure-activity relationship of 
naphtho[1,2-b]furan-2-carboxamide derivatives as melanin concentrating hormone 
receptor 1 antagonists.

Lim CJ(1), Choi JY, Lee BH, Oh KS, Yi KY.

Author information:
(1)Division of Drug Discovery Research, Korea Research Institute of Chemical 
Technology.

The discovery that novel naphtho[1,2-b]furan-2-carboxamides containing linked 
piperidinylphenylacetamide groups serve as melanin concentrating hormone 
receptor 1 (MCH-R1) antagonists is described. An extensive structure-activity 
relationship (SAR) study, probing members of this family that contain a variety 
of aryl and heteroaryl groups at C-5 of the naphtho[1,2-b]furan-2-carboxamide 
skeleton and having different chain linker lengths, led to the identification of 
the 5-(4-pyridinyl) substituted analog 10b as a highly potent MCH-R1 antagonist 
with an IC50 value of 3 nM. This substance also displays good metabolic 
stability and it does not significantly inhibit cytochrome P450 (CYP450) 
enzymes. However, 10b has unacceptable oral bioavailability.

DOI: 10.1248/cpb.c13-00486
PMID: 24292786 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Am J Clin Nutr. 2014 Feb;99(2):384-91. doi: 10.3945/ajcn.113.073387. Epub
2013  Dec 4.

Melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 polymorphisms are associated with 
components of energy balance in the Complex Diseases in the Newfoundland 
Population: Environment and Genetics (CODING) study.

Fontaine-Bisson B(1), Thorburn J, Gregory A, Zhang H, Sun G.

Author information:
(1)Nutrition Sciences Program, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Ottawa, 
Ottawa, Canada (BF-B), and the Discipline of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, 
Memorial University, St John's, Canada (JT, AG, HZ, and GS).

BACKGROUND: The melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1) is a G 
protein-coupled receptor that regulates energy balance and body composition in 
animal models. Inconsistent effects of MCHR1 polymorphisms on energy homeostasis 
in humans may partly be attributable to environmental factors.
OBJECTIVES: We examined the effect of 4 single nucleotide polymorphisms 
(rs133073, rs133074, rs9611386, and rs882111) in the MCHR1 gene on body 
composition as well as energy-related lifestyle factors (diet and physical 
activity). We also examined the effect of gene-lifestyle interactions on body 
composition.
DESIGN: A total of 1153 participants (248 men and 905 women) from the 
cross-sectional Complex Diseases in the Newfoundland Population: Environment and 
Genetics (CODING) study were genotyped by using probe-based chemistry validated 
assays. Diet and physical activity were estimated by using validated frequency 
questionnaires, and body composition was assessed by using dual-energy X-ray 
absorptiometry.
RESULTS: Three polymorphisms (rs9611386, rs882111, and rs133073) were associated 
with differences in body-composition measurements (all P < 0.05). There was an 
interaction between rs9611386 and carbohydrate intake on total mass and waist 
circumference (both P ≤ 0.01). There was also an interaction between rs9611386 
and body mass index categories (normal weight, overweight, and obese) on energy 
intakes (P = 0.02). A similar interaction was shown with rs882111 (P = 0.02). 
Interactions were also observed between each of these polymorphisms (rs9611386, 
rs882111, and rs133073) and physical activity score on body-composition 
measurements (all P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that polymorphisms in the MCHR1 gene are 
associated with differences in body composition and interact with physiologic 
and energy-related lifestyle factors.

DOI: 10.3945/ajcn.113.073387
PMID: 24305679 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2013 Nov 25;4:182. doi:
10.3389/fendo.2013.00182.  eCollection 2013.

Control of ventricular ciliary beating by the melanin concentrating 
hormone-expressing neurons of the lateral hypothalamus: a functional imaging 
survey.

Conductier G(1), Martin AO, Risold PY, Jego S, Lavoie R, Lafont C, Mollard P, 
Adamantidis A, Nahon JL.

Author information:
(1)UMR7275, Institut de Pharmacologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Centre National 
de la Recherche Scientifique , Valbonne , France ; University of Nice Sophia 
Antipolis , Nice , France.

The cyclic peptide Melanin Concentrating Hormone (MCH) is known to control a 
large number of brain functions in mammals such as food intake and metabolism, 
stress response, anxiety, sleep/wake cycle, memory, and reward. Based on 
neuro-anatomical and electrophysiological studies these functions were 
attributed to neuronal circuits expressing MCHR1, the single MCH receptor in 
rodents. In complement to our recently published work (1) we provided here new 
data regarding the action of MCH on ependymocytes in the mouse brain. First, we 
establish that MCHR1 mRNA is expressed in the ependymal cells of the third 
ventricle epithelium. Second, we demonstrated a tonic control of MCH-expressing 
neurons on ependymal cilia beat frequency using in vitro optogenics. Finally, we 
performed in vivo measurements of CSF flow using fluorescent micro-beads in 
wild-type and MCHR1-knockout mice. Collectively, our results demonstrated that 
MCH-expressing neurons modulate ciliary beating of ependymal cells at the third 
ventricle and could contribute to maintain cerebro-spinal fluid homeostasis.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2013.00182
PMCID: PMC3839296
PMID: 24324458


308. Int J Endocrinol. 2013;2013:143052. doi: 10.1155/2013/143052. Epub 2013 Nov
17.

Analyzing the role of receptor internalization in the regulation of 
melanin-concentrating hormone signaling.

Moden JI(1), Haude K(1), Carroll R(1), Goodspeed A(1), Cook LB(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, 217 Lennon Hall, The College at Brockport, State 
University of New York, 350 New Campus Drive, Brockport, NY 14420, USA.

The regulation of appetite is complex, though our understanding of the process 
is improving. The potential role for the melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) 
signaling pathway in the treatment of obesity is being explored by many. It was 
hypothesized that internalization of MCH receptors would act to potently 
desensitize cells to MCH. Despite potent desensitization of ERK signaling by MCH 
in BHK-570 cells, we were unable to observe MCH-mediated internalization of MCH 
receptor 1 (MCHR1) by fluorescence microscopy. A more quantitative approach 
using a cell-based ELISA indicated only 15% of receptors internalized, which is 
much lower than that reported in the literature. When β-arrestins were 
overexpressed in our system, removal of receptors from the cell surface was 
facilitated and signaling to a leptin promoter was diminished, suggesting that 
internalization of MCHR1 is sensitive to cellular β-arrestin levels. A 
dominant-negative GRK construct completely inhibited loss of receptors from the 
cell surface in response to MCH, suggesting that the internalization observed is 
phosphorylation-dependent. Since desensitization of MCH-mediated ERK signaling 
did not correlate with significant loss of MCHR1 from the cell surface, we 
hypothesize that in this model system regulation of MCH signaling may be the 
result of segregation of receptors from signaling components at the plasma 
membrane.

DOI: 10.1155/2013/143052
PMCID: PMC3855962
PMID: 24348551


309. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2013;2013:145925. doi:
10.1155/2013/145925.  Epub 2013 Nov 14.

Effect of Nelumbo nucifera Petal Extracts on Lipase, Adipogenesis, Adipolysis, 
and Central Receptors of Obesity.

Velusami CC(1), Agarwal A(2), Mookambeswaran V(3).

Author information:
(1)R&D Centre, Natural Remedies Pvt. Ltd., Plot No. 5B, Veerasandra Industrial 
Area, 19th K.M. Stone, Hosur Road, Bangalore, Karnataka 560100, India ; Center 
for Bioseparation Technology, VIT University, Vellore, Tamil Nadu 632014, India.
(2)R&D Centre, Natural Remedies Pvt. Ltd., Plot No. 5B, Veerasandra Industrial 
Area, 19th K.M. Stone, Hosur Road, Bangalore, Karnataka 560100, India.
(3)Center for Bioseparation Technology, VIT University, Vellore, Tamil Nadu 
632014, India.

N. nucifera is one among the important medicinal plants assessed for its 
antiobesity action in various preclinical models. The present study was aimed at 
investigating the antiobesity effect of methanol and successive water extracts 
of petals of N. nucifera by studying its effect on adipogenesis, adipolysis, 
lipase, serotonin (5-HT2C), cannabinoid (CNR2), melanocyte concentrating hormone 
(MCHR1), and melanocortin (MC4R) receptors. Both methanol and successive water 
extracts of N. nucifera petals had an effect on inhibition of lipid storage in 
adipocytes and on increasing lipolysis. N. nucifera petal methanol extract 
exhibited the concentration-dependent inhibitory effect on lipase activity with 
an IC50 value of 47 µg/mL. N. nucifera petal extracts showed evident agonist and 
antagonist activity towards 5-HT2C and CNR2 receptors, respectively, while it 
showed no effect towards MCHR1 and MC4R receptors. Overall, methanol extract of 
N. nucifera petals showed better activity than successive water extract.

DOI: 10.1155/2013/145925
PMCID: PMC3848046
PMID: 24348689


310. Acta Pharm Hung. 2013;83(3):71-87.

[Selection of a melanine concentrating hormone receptor-1 (MCHR1) antagonists' 
focused library and its biological screening with AequoScreen].

[Article in Hungarian]

Flachner B(1), Hajdú I(1), Dobi K(1), Lorincz Z(1), Cseh S(1), Dormán G(1).

Author information:
(1)TargetEx, H-2120 Kápolna köz 4/a, Dunakeszi, Hungary.

Target focused libraries can be rapidly selected by 2D virtual screening methods 
from multimillion compounds' repositories if structures of active compounds are 
available. In the present study a multi-step virtual and in vitro screening 
cascade is reported to select Melanin Concentrating Hormone Receptor-1 (MCHR1) 
antagonists. The 2D similarity search combined with physicochemical parameter 
filtering is suitable for selecting candidates from multimillion compounds' 
repository. The seeds of the first round virtual screening were collected from 
the literature and commercial databases, while the seeds of the second round 
were the hits of the first round. In vitro screening underlined the efficiency 
of our approach, as in the second screening round the hit rate (8.6 %) 
significantly improved compared to the first round (1.9%), reaching the 
antagonist activity even below 10 nM.

PMID: 24369586 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Behav Brain Res. 2014 Apr 1;262:14-20. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2013.12.052. Epub
2014  Jan 8.

Amphetamine reward in food restricted mice lacking the melanin-concentrating 
hormone receptor-1.

Geuzaine A(1), Tyhon A(1), Grisar T(2), Brabant C(1), Lakaye B(3), Tirelli E(1).

Author information:
(1)Département de Psychologie, Cognition et Comportement, University of Liège, 
B-4000 Liège, Belgium.
(2)GIGA-Neurosciences, University of Liège, B-4000 Liège, Belgium.
(3)GIGA-Neurosciences, University of Liège, B-4000 Liège, Belgium. Electronic 
address: B.Lakaye@ulg.ac.be.

Chronic food restriction (FR) and maintenance of low body weight have long been 
known to increase the rewarding and motor-activating effects of addictive drugs. 
However, the neurobiological mechanisms through which FR potentiates drug reward 
remain largely unknown. Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) signaling could be 
one of these mechanisms since this peptide is involved in energy homeostasis and 
modulates mesolimbic dopaminergic transmission. The purpose of the present study 
was to test this hypothesis by investigating the impact of FR on amphetamine 
reward in wild-type (WT) and knockout mice lacking the melanin-concentrating 
hormone receptor-1 (MCHR1-KO). The rewarding effects of amphetamine (0.75-2.25 
mg/kg, i.p.) were measured with the conditioned place preference (CPP) 
technique. The food of the mice was restricted to maintain their body weight at 
80-85% of their free-feeding (FF) weight throughout the entire CPP experiment. 
Locomotor activity of the animals was recorded during the conditioning sessions. 
Our results show that locomotion of all the food-restricted mice treated with 
saline or amphetamine increased over the sessions whatever the genotype. On the 
place preference test, the amplitude of CPP induced by 0.75 mg/kg amphetamine 
was higher in food restricted WT mice than in free-fed WT mice and food 
restricted MCHR1-KO mice. However, FR did not affect amphetamine reward in 
MCHR1-KO mice. The present results indicate that MCH signaling could be involved 
in the ability of FR to increase amphetamine-induced CPP.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2013.12.052
PMID: 24412349 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Peptides. 2014 May;55:58-64. doi: 10.1016/j.peptides.2014.02.005. Epub 2014
Feb  18.

Inflammation-induced functional connectivity of melanin-concentrating hormone 
and IL-10.

Ziogas DC(1), Karagiannis AK(1), Geiger BM(1), Gras-Miralles B(1), Najarian 
R(1), Reizes O(2), Fitzpatrick LR(3), Kokkotou E(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, United States.
(2)Cleveland Clinic Foundation Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland, OH 44195, 
United States.
(3)Penn State College of Medicine, Hershey, PA 17036, United States.
(4)Division of Gastroenterology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, United States. Electronic address: 
ekokkoto@bidmc.harvard.edu.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) was identified in mammals as a hypothalamic 
neuropeptide regulating appetite and energy balance. However, similarly to most 
of the brain peptides, MCH is also produced in the gastrointestinal system and 
can act locally as an immunomodulator. We have previously reported high 
expression of MCH and its receptor MCHR1 in the affected mucosa of patients with 
inflammatory bowel disease. Furthermore, MCH deficiency in mice attenuated 
experimental colitis, pointing to MCH as a mediator of intestinal inflammation. 
In the present study, in order to gain further insights into the underlying 
mechanisms of such effects of MCH, we treated mice with established experimental 
colitis due to IL-10 deficiency with a MCHR1 antagonist (DABA-822). While 
treatment with the same drug was successful in attenuating TNBS-induced colitis 
in previous studies, it offered no benefit to the IL-10 knockout mouse model, 
suggesting that perhaps IL-10 is a downstream target of MCH. Indeed, in 
experiments focusing on monocytes, we found that treatment with MCH inhibited 
LPS-mediated IL-10 upregulation. Conversely, in the same cells, exogenous IL-10 
prevented LPS-induced MCHR1 expression. Taken together, these findings indicate 
a functional cross-talk between MCH and IL-10 which prevents resolution of 
inflammation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.peptides.2014.02.005
PMCID: PMC4004662
PMID: 24556508 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Leo R. Fitzpatrick has been 
the recipient of a Research Grant from, and Ofer Reizes has been a former 
employee of Procter and Gamble Pharmaceuticals that developed the MCHR1 
antagonist DABA-822.The rest of the authors declare no conflict of interest.


313. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2015 Feb 1;212:114-23. doi:
10.1016/j.ygcen.2014.03.005.  Epub 2014 Mar 21.

Molecular cloning, expression, and signaling pathway of four 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptors from Xenopus tropicalis.

Kobayashi Y(1), Hamamoto A(1), Hirayama T(1), Saito Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Integrated Arts and Sciences, Hiroshima University, 
Higashi-hiroshima, Hiroshima 739-8521, Japan.
(2)Graduate School of Integrated Arts and Sciences, Hiroshima University, 
Higashi-hiroshima, Hiroshima 739-8521, Japan. Electronic address: 
yumist@hiroshima-u.ac.jp.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) mainly regulates feeding in mammals and 
pigmentation in teleosts. It acts via two G-protein-coupled receptors, MCH 
receptor 1 (MCHR1) and MCHR2. Although many studies exploring the MCH system in 
teleosts and mammals have been carried out, studies on other organisms are 
limited. In this study, we cloned and characterized four MCHR subtypes from the 
diploid species Xenopus tropicalis (X-MCHRs; X-MCHR1a, R1b, R2a, and R2b). 
According to a phylogenetic tree of the X-MCHRs, X-MCHR1a and R2a are close to 
mammalian MCHRs, while X-MCHR1b and R2b are close to teleostean MCHRs. We 
previously reported that the G-protein coupling capacity of the MCHR subtypes 
differed between mammals (R1: Gαi/o and Gαq; R2: Gαq) and teleosts (R1: Gαq; R2: 
Gαi/o and Gαq) in mammalian cell-based assays. By using Ca(2+) mobilization 
assays with pertussis toxin in CHO dhfr(-) cells, we found that X-MCHR1a 
promiscuously coupled to both Gαi/o and Gαq, while X-MCHR1b and R2a exclusively 
coupled to Gαq. However, no Ca(2+) influx was detected in cells transfected with 
X-MCHR2b. Reverse transcription-PCR showed that the X-MCHR mRNAs were expressed 
in various tissues. In particular, both X-MCHR1b and R2b were exclusively found 
in melanophores of the dorsal skin. In skin pigment migration assays, 
melanophores were weakly aggregated at low concentrations but dispersed at high 
concentrations of MCH, suggesting possible interactions between X-MCHR1b and R2b 
for the regulation of body color. These findings demonstrate that X. tropicalis 
has four characteristic MCHRs and will be useful for elucidating the nature of 
MCHR evolution among vertebrates.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2014.03.005
PMID: 24662390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Br J Pharmacol. 2014 Mar;171(5):1287-98. doi: 10.1111/bph.12529.

The MCH(1) receptor, an anti-obesity target, is allosterically inhibited by 
8-methylquinoline derivatives possessing subnanomolar binding and long residence 
times.

Sakurai T(1), Ogawa K, Ishihara Y, Kasai S, Nakayama M.

Author information:
(1)Pharmaceutical Research Division, Takeda Pharmaceutical Company Limited, 
Kanagawa, Japan.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCH1 receptor) 
antagonists are being considered as anti-obesity agents. The present study 
reports a new class of MCH1 receptor antagonists with an 8-methylquinoline 
scaffold. The molecular mechanism of MCH1 receptor blockade by these antagonists 
was examined.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: The pharmacological properties of the 8-methylquinolines 
as exemplified by MQ1 were evaluated by use of multiple biophysical and 
cell-based functional assays.
KEY RESULTS: Multiple signalling pathways for Gαi and Gαq , and β-arrestin were 
inhibited by MQ1. Furthermore, MQ1 produced an insurmountable antagonism, 
causing a rightward shift of the curve for concentration-dependent binding of 
MCH along with a progressive reduction of the maximal response. The dissociation 
kinetics for MQ1 were determined from washout experiments as well as by affinity 
selection-MS. In short, MQ1 was shown to be a slowly dissociating reversible 
MCH1 receptor blocker with a low Koff value.
CONCLUSION AND IMPLICATIONS: This is the first time that a slowly dissociating 
negative allosteric modulator of the MCH1 receptor has been demonstrated to 
inhibit the numerous signalling pathways of this receptor. The characteristics 
of MQ1 are superior and distinct from previously reported MCH1 receptor 
antagonists, making members of this chemotype attractive as drug candidates.

© 2013 The British Pharmacological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/bph.12529
PMCID: PMC3952805
PMID: 24670150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Eur J Pharmacol. 2014 Jul 15;735:177-83. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2014.04.020.
Epub  2014 Apr 26.

Comparative autoradiographic in vitro investigation of melanin concentrating 
hormone receptor 1 ligands in the central nervous system.

Philippe C(1), Haeusler D(2), Fuchshuber F(1), Spreitzer H(3), Viernstein H(4), 
Hacker M(2), Wadsak W(2), Mitterhauser M(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Imaging and Image-guided Therapy, Divison of Nuclear 
Medicine, Radiopharmacy and Experimental Nuclear Medicine, Medical University of 
Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria; Department of Pharmaceutical Technology and 
Biopharmaceutics, University of Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria.
(2)Department of Biomedical Imaging and Image-guided Therapy, Divison of Nuclear 
Medicine, Radiopharmacy and Experimental Nuclear Medicine, Medical University of 
Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria.
(3)Department of Drug and Natural Product Synthesis, University of Vienna, 1090 
Vienna, Austria.
(4)Department of Pharmaceutical Technology and Biopharmaceutics, University of 
Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria.
(5)Department of Biomedical Imaging and Image-guided Therapy, Divison of Nuclear 
Medicine, Radiopharmacy and Experimental Nuclear Medicine, Medical University of 
Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria; Department of Pharmaceutical Technology and 
Biopharmaceutics, University of Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria. Electronic 
address: markus.mitterhauser@meduniwien.ac.at.

The MCHR1 is an interesting pharmacological and pharmaceutical target, due to 
its involvement in pathologies as diabetes, gut inflammation and adiposity. in 
vivo PET-studies of the MCHR1 in energy homeostasis and diabetes could be of 
great value for deeper understanding of endocrinological hormone status and 
consequential pharmacological interactions. Furthermore, PET-tracers would 
facilitate compound dose selection of MCHR1 antagonists for treatment. 
Therefore, we developed two potential PET-tracers, [(11)C]SNAP-7941 and 
[(18)F]FE@SNAP, for the in vivo visualization of this receptor. Aim of this 
study was a preclinical in vitro evaluation of both unlabeled ligands. 
Therefore, a comparative autoradiographic investigation on CNS (coronal rat 
brain and 4 different human brain regions) and peripheral tissues (rat tongue as 
target and rat testes as non-target region) was conducted. Competition 
experiments, using the two radioligands [(125)I]-MCH and [(125)I]-S36057, were 
performed with selective and specific MCHR1 ligands as PMC-3886, a MCHR1 
agonist, SNAP-7941 and FE@SNAP, two MCHR1 antagonists. Additionally, 
immunohistochemical staining with a specific MCHR1 antibody was performed. 
Specific binding was found in all tissues known to express the MCHR1 as human 
and rat CNS and peripheral rat tongue tissue. No specific binding was found in 
the non-target region of rat testes. MCHR1 antibody staining complemented the 
outcome of the autoradiographic experiments. The compounds SNAP-7941 and FE@SNAP 
were generally comparable with PMC-3886. Hence, the in vitro autoradiographic 
study of the unlabeled compounds SNAP-7941 and FE@SNAP further qualifies the 
potential of the PET-tracers [(11)C]SNAP-7941 and [(18)F]FE@SNAP as useful MCHR1 
PET-tracers.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2014.04.020
PMID: 24780646 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Recent Pat CNS Drug Discov. 2014;9(2):122-40. doi: 
10.2174/1574889809666140613115426.

Recent patents on novel MCH1 receptor antagonists as potential anti-obesity 
drugs.

Szalai KK, Beke G, Éles J, Kitka T, Kovács P, Nagy J, Farkas S, Boros A(1).

Author information:
(1)Gyomroi u. 24, 1103 Budapest, Hungary. a.boros@richter.hu.

Today, the 'obesity pandemic' is one of the biggest health issues around the 
world. Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH), a hypothalamic neuropeptide, is one 
of the most potent, central stimulators of feeding and it also attenuates energy 
expenditure. Inhibitions of the MCH receptor, the melanin-concentrating hormone 
receptor-1 (MCHR1), has attracted considerable attention as a potential 
anti-obesity drug, during the last decade. Now, there are a large number of 
MCHR1 antagonists, pharmacological tools and clinical drug candidates that can 
provide clues to develop new structures with high potency and good 
pharmacokinetic profile. The function of MCHR1 in energy homeostasis, obesity, 
metabolic syndrome, mood disorders and inflammatory bowel disease is discussed. 
Relevant clinical trials and patent background information of the MCHR1 
antagonists over the last 4 years are also reviewed.

DOI: 10.2174/1574889809666140613115426
PMID: 24924101 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


317. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 12;9(6):e99961. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0099961. 
eCollection 2014.

Meta-analysis of melanin-concentrating hormone signaling-deficient mice on 
behavioral and metabolic phenotypes.

Takase K(1), Kikuchi K(2), Tsuneoka Y(1), Oda S(1), Kuroda M(1), Funato H(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy, Toho University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Information Science, Faculty of Science, Toho University, 
Chiba, Japan.
(3)Department of Anatomy, Toho University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan; 
International Institutes for Integrative Sleep Medicine, University of Tsukuba, 
Ibaraki, Japan.

The demand for meta-analyses in basic biomedical research has been increasing 
because the phenotyping of genetically modified mice does not always produce 
consistent results. Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) has been reported to be 
involved in a variety of behaviors that include feeding, body-weight regulation, 
anxiety, sleep, and reward behavior. However, the reported behavioral and 
metabolic characteristics of MCH signaling-deficient mice, such as MCH-deficient 
mice and MCH receptor 1 (MCHR1)-deficient mice, are not consistent with each 
other. In the present study, we performed a meta-analysis of the published data 
related to MCH-deficient and MCHR1-deficient mice to obtain robust conclusions 
about the role of MCH signaling. Overall, the meta-analysis revealed that the 
deletion of MCH signaling enhanced wakefulness, locomotor activity, aggression, 
and male sexual behavior and that MCH signaling deficiency suppressed non-REM 
sleep, anxiety, responses to novelty, startle responses, and conditioned place 
preferences. In contrast to the acute orexigenic effect of MCH, MCH signaling 
deficiency significantly increased food intake. Overall, the meta-analysis also 
revealed that the deletion of MCH signaling suppressed the body weight, fat 
mass, and plasma leptin, while MCH signaling deficiency increased the body 
temperature, oxygen consumption, heart rate, and mean arterial pressure. The 
lean phenotype of the MCH signaling-deficient mice was also confirmed in 
separate meta-analyses that were specific to sex and background strain (i.e., 
C57BL/6 and 129Sv). MCH signaling deficiency caused a weak anxiolytic effect as 
assessed with the elevated plus maze and the open field test but also caused a 
weak anxiogenic effect as assessed with the emergence test. MCH 
signaling-deficient mice also exhibited increased plasma corticosterone under 
non-stressed conditions, which suggests enhanced activity of the 
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. To the best of our knowledge, the present 
work is the first study to systematically compare the effects of MCH signaling 
on behavioral and metabolic phenotypes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0099961
PMCID: PMC4055708
PMID: 24924345 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: This work was partly 
supported by the Research Grant from Nestle Nutrition Council Japan to HF. This 
does not alter the authors’ adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and 
materials.


318. J Comp Neurol. 2014 Dec 1;522(17):3817-33. doi: 10.1002/cne.23642. Epub 2014
Jul  17.

Identification of neuropeptide receptors expressed by melanin-concentrating 
hormone neurons.

Parks GS(1), Wang L, Wang Z, Civelli O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of California Irvine, Irvine, 
California, 92697; Department of Developmental and Cell Biology, University of 
California Irvine, Irvine, California, 92697.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a 19-amino-acid cyclic neuropeptide that 
acts in rodents via the MCH receptor 1 (MCHR1) to regulate a wide variety of 
physiological functions. MCH is produced by a distinct population of neurons 
located in the lateral hypothalamus (LH) and zona incerta (ZI), but MCHR1 mRNA 
is widely expressed throughout the brain. The physiological responses and 
behaviors regulated by the MCH system have been investigated, but less is known 
about how MCH neurons are regulated. The effects of most classical 
neurotransmitters on MCH neurons have been studied, but those of most 
neuropeptides are poorly understood. To gain insight into how neuropeptides 
regulate the MCH system, we investigated which neuropeptide receptors are 
expressed by MCH neurons by using double in situ hybridization. In all, 20 
receptors, selected based on either a suspected interaction with the MCH system 
or demonstrated high expression levels in the LH and ZI, were tested to 
determine whether they are expressed by MCH neurons. Overall, 11 neuropeptide 
receptors were found to exhibit significant colocalization with MCH neurons: 
nociceptin/orphanin FQ opioid receptor (NOP), MCHR1, both orexin receptors 
(ORX), somatostatin receptors 1 and 2 (SSTR1, SSTR2), kisspeptin recepotor 
(KissR1), neurotensin receptor 1 (NTSR1), neuropeptide S receptor (NPSR), 
cholecystokinin receptor A (CCKAR), and the κ-opioid receptor (KOR). Among these 
receptors, six have never before been linked to the MCH system. Surprisingly, 
several receptors thought to regulate MCH neurons displayed minimal 
colocalization with MCH, suggesting that they may not directly regulate the MCH 
system.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/cne.23642
PMCID: PMC4167928
PMID: 24978951 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Behav Pharmacol. 2014 Aug;25(4):316-24. doi: 10.1097/FBP.0000000000000056.

Prodepressive effect induced by microinjections of MCH into the dorsal raphe: 
time course, dose dependence, effects on anxiety-related behaviors, and 
reversion by nortriptyline.

Urbanavicius J(1), Lagos P, Torterolo P, Scorza C.

Author information:
(1)aLaboratory of Cell Biology bDepartment of Experimental Neuropharmacology, 
Instituto de Investigaciones Biológicas Clemente Estable cDepartment of 
Physiology, Facultad de Medicina, Montevideo, Uruguay.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) administered within the rat dorsal raphe 
nucleus (DRN) has been shown to elicit prodepressive behaviors in the 
forced-swim test. The present study was designed to evaluate the time course (30 
and 60 min) and dose dependence (25-100 ng) of this effect, and whether it would 
be antagonized by an intra-DRN microinjection of the MCH-1 receptor antagonist 
ATC0175 (ATC, 1 mmol/l) or intraperitoneal pretreatment with the noradrenergic 
antidepressant nortriptyline (20 mg/kg). The results showed that the behavioral 
effect of MCH was time and dose dependent as immobility was increased, and 
climbing decreased, only by the 50 ng MCH dose at T30. The effect was mediated 
by MCH-1 receptors as a significant blockade of this behavioral response was 
observed in ATC-pretreated animals. ATC did not by itself modify animal 
behavior. Nortriptyline also prevented the prodepressive-like effect of MCH. 
Concomitantly, the effect of MCH (50 ng) at T30 on anxiety-related behaviors was 
assessed using the elevated plus-maze. Interestingly, these behaviors were 
unchanged. In conclusion, MCH administration within the DRN elicits, through the 
MCH-1 receptor, a depression-related behavior that is not accompanied by changes 
in anxiety and that is prevented by a noradrenergic antidepressant.

DOI: 10.1097/FBP.0000000000000056
PMID: 25006977 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


320. J Med Chem. 2014 Sep 25;57(18):7509-22. doi: 10.1021/jm500026w. Epub 2014
Sep 9.

Identification of a nonbasic melanin hormone receptor 1 antagonist as an 
antiobesity clinical candidate.

Washburn WN(1), Manfredi M, Devasthale P, Zhao G, Ahmad S, Hernandez A, Robl JA, 
Wang W, Mignone J, Wang Z, Ngu K, Pelleymounter MA, Longhi D, Zhao R, Wang B, 
Huang N, Flynn N, Azzara AV, Barrish JC, Rohrbach K, Devenny JJ, Rooney S, 
Thomas M, Glick S, Godonis HE, Harvey SJ, Cullen MJ, Zhang H, Caporuscio C, 
Stetsko P, Grubb M, Maxwell BD, Yang H, Apedo A, Gemzik B, Janovitz EB, Huang C, 
Zhang L, Freeden C, Murphy BJ.

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Diseases Chemistry, ‡Metabolic Diseases Biology, §Preclinical 
Candidate Optimization Metabolism and Pharmacokinetics, ∥Discovery Chemistry 
Synthesis, ⊥Preclinical Candidate Optimization Discovery Toxicology, 
#Preclinical Candidate Optimization Discovery Bioanalytical Research, 
∞Preclinical Candidate Optimization Biotransformation, ×Preclinical Candidate 
Optimization Pharmaceutics, and ○Preclinical Candidate Optimization DAS SPS, 
Research and Development, Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. , Princeton, New Jersey 
08543-5400, United States.

Identification of MCHR1 antagonists with a preclinical safety profile to support 
clinical evaluation as antiobesity agents has been a challenge. Our finding that 
a basic moiety is not required for MCHR1 antagonists to achieve high affinity 
allowed us to explore structures less prone to off-target activities such as 
hERG inhibition. We report the SAR evolution of hydroxylated thienopyrimidinone 
ethers culminating in the identification of 27 (BMS-819881), which entered 
obesity clinical trials as the phosphate ester prodrug 35 (BMS-830216).

DOI: 10.1021/jm500026w
PMID: 25165888 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Int J Mol Sci. 2014 Sep 1;15(9):15475-502. doi: 10.3390/ijms150915475.

Profiling the interaction mechanism of quinoline/quinazoline derivatives as 
MCHR1 antagonists: an in silico method.

Wu M(1), Li Y(2), Fu X(3), Wang J(4), Zhang S(5), Yang L(6).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Industrial Ecology and Environmental Engineering (MOE), 
Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116024, China. audi.lg@163.com.
(2)Key Laboratory of Industrial Ecology and Environmental Engineering (MOE), 
Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116024, China. yanli@dlut.edu.cn.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Fine Chemicals, Dalian University of Technology, 
Dalian 116024, China. fuxinmei@dlut.edu.cn.
(4)Key Laboratory of Industrial Ecology and Environmental Engineering (MOE), 
Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116024, China. jhwang_dlut@163.com.
(5)Key Laboratory of Industrial Ecology and Environmental Engineering (MOE), 
Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116024, China. zswei@dlut.edu.cn.
(6)Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Resource Discovery, Dalian Institute of Chemical 
Physics, Graduate School of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian 116023, 
China. yling@dicp.ac.cn.

Melanin concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1), a crucial regulator of energy 
homeostasis involved in the control of feeding and energy metabolism, is a 
promising target for treatment of obesity. In the present work, the up-to-date 
largest set of 181 quinoline/quinazoline derivatives as MCHR1 antagonists was 
subjected to both ligand- and receptor-based three-dimensional quantitative 
structure-activity (3D-QSAR) analysis applying comparative molecular field 
analysis (CoMFA) and comparative molecular similarity indices analysis (CoMSIA). 
The optimal predictable CoMSIA model exhibited significant validity with the 
cross-validated correlation coefficient (Q²) = 0.509, non-cross-validated 
correlation coefficient (R²(ncv)) = 0.841 and the predicted correlation 
coefficient (R²(pred)) = 0.745. In addition, docking studies and molecular 
dynamics (MD) simulations were carried out for further elucidation of the 
binding modes of MCHR1 antagonists. MD simulations in both water and lipid 
bilayer systems were performed. We hope that the obtained models and information 
may help to provide an insight into the interaction mechanism of MCHR1 
antagonists and facilitate the design and optimization of novel antagonists as 
anti-obesity agents.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms150915475
PMCID: PMC4200842
PMID: 25257526 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


322. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 26;9(11):e112109. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0112109. 
eCollection 2014.

Monoclonal antibody targeting of fibroblast growth factor receptor 1c 
ameliorates obesity and glucose intolerance via central mechanisms.

Lelliott CJ(1), Ahnmark A(1), Admyre T(2), Ahlstedt I(1), Irving L(3), Keyes 
F(3), Patterson L(4), Mumphrey MB(4), Bjursell M(2), Gorman T(5), Bohlooly-Y 
M(2), Buchanan A(3), Harrison P(3), Vaughan T(3), Berthoud HR(4), Lindén D(1).

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular & Metabolic Disease Innovative Medicines, Dept of Bioscience 
Diabetes, AstraZeneca, Mölndal, Sweden.
(2)Discovery Sciences Transgenics, AstraZeneca, Mölndal, Sweden.
(3)Antibody Discovery and Protein Engineering, MedImmune, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom.
(4)Neurobiology of Nutrition Laboratory, Pennington Biomedical Research Center, 
Baton Rouge, United States of America.
(5)AstraZeneca, Discovery Sciences, Mereside, Alderley Park, Macclesfield, 
Cheshire, United Kingdom.

We have generated a novel monoclonal antibody targeting human FGFR1c (R1c mAb) 
that caused profound body weight and body fat loss in diet-induced obese mice 
due to decreased food intake (with energy expenditure unaltered), in turn 
improving glucose control. R1c mAb also caused weight loss in leptin-deficient 
ob/ob mice, leptin receptor-mutant db/db mice, and in mice lacking either the 
melanocortin 4 receptor or the melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1. In 
addition, R1c mAb did not change hypothalamic mRNA expression levels of Agrp, 
Cart, Pomc, Npy, Crh, Mch, or Orexin, suggesting that R1c mAb could cause food 
intake inhibition and body weight loss via other mechanisms in the brain. 
Interestingly, peripherally administered R1c mAb accumulated in the median 
eminence, adjacent arcuate nucleus and in the circumventricular organs where it 
activated the early response gene c-Fos. As a plausible mechanism and coinciding 
with the initiation of food intake suppression, R1c mAb induced hypothalamic 
expression levels of the cytokines Monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 and 3 and 
ERK1/2 and p70 S6 kinase 1 activation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0112109
PMCID: PMC4245083
PMID: 25427253 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: All authors except L.P., 
M.B.M., and H-R.B. are/were AstraZeneca or MedImmune employees and have stock 
options in these companies. This does not alter the authors' adherence to PLOS 
ONE policies on sharing data and materials.


323. Pharmacol Res Perspect. 2013 Oct;1(1):e00003. doi: 10.1002/prp2.3. Epub 2013
Sep  17.

Evaluation of AMG 076, a potent and selective MCHR1 antagonist, in rodent and 
primate obesity models.

Motani AS(1), Luo J(1), Liang L(1), Mihalic JT(1), Chen X(1), Tang L(1), Li 
L(1), Jaen J(1), Chen JL(1), Dai K(1).

Author information:
(1)Discovery Research, Amgen, Inc.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) regulates food intake through activation of 
the receptor, MCHR1. We have identified AMG 076 as an orally bioavailable potent 
and selective small molecule antagonist of MCHR1. In mouse models of obesity, 
AMG 076 caused a reduction in body weight gain in wild-type (MCHR1+/+) but not 
in knockout (MCHR1-/-) mice. The body weight reduction was associated with 
decreases in food intake and increases in energy expenditure. Importantly, we 
show that these MCHR1-dependent effects of AMG 076 were also reflected in 
improved metabolic phenotypes, increased glucose tolerance and insulin 
sensitivity. Preliminary data on effects of AMG 076 in obese cynomolgus monkeys 
are also presented.

DOI: 10.1002/prp2.3
PMCID: PMC4184568
PMID: 25505557


324. Expert Opin Ther Pat. 2015 Feb;25(2):193-207. doi:
10.1517/13543776.2014.993382.  Epub 2014 Dec 18.

Novel MCH1 receptor antagonists: a patent review.

Johansson A(1), Löfberg C.

Author information:
(1)AstraZeneca R&D Mölndal , S-431 83 Mölndal , Sweden +46 31 776 2822 ; +46 31 
776 3702 ; anders.m.johansson@astrazeneca.com.

INTRODUCTION: The cyclic neuropeptide melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) shows 
appetite-stimulating effects indicating an involvement in obesity. Large efforts 
have been invested in discovery programs to identify novel MCH1 receptor (MCHR1) 
antagonists. Other indications where MCHR1 antagonists may have a potential use 
include: anxiety/depression and, more recently, inflammatory responses in the 
gastrointestinal tract.
AREAS COVERED: The current review covers the patent literature on MCHR1 
antagonists published from November 2010 to March 2014. The applications have 
been grouped by filing company, and weight has been put on commenting compounds 
with disclosed in vivo biological data.
EXPERT OPINION: Achieving sufficient separation of the human EtheR-a-Go-go 
channel has prevented many programs from reaching the clinic. For clinical 
programs, CNS exposure seems to have been a major challenge. Although clinical 
studies of MCHR1 antagonists have not been able to conclusively evaluate the 
concept, the body of evidence suggesting a role for MCHR1 antagonists in weight 
management is strong and novel chemical series still appear in the patent 
literature. An MCHR1 antagonist with the appropriate physical chemical 
properties is needed to convincingly evaluate the MCHR1 concept for obesity 
treatment and, as knowledge from previous programs are shared, the discovery of 
such a compound should be achievable.

DOI: 10.1517/13543776.2014.993382
PMID: 25522065 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


325. J Chem Inf Model. 2015 Jan 26;55(1):1-18. doi: 10.1021/ci500542e. Epub 2015
Jan  13.

Novel Scaffold FingerPrint (SFP): applications in scaffold hopping and 
scaffold-based selection of diverse compounds.

Rabal O(1), Amr FI, Oyarzabal J.

Author information:
(1)Small Molecule Discovery Platform, Molecular Therapeutics Program, Center for 
Applied Medical Research (CIMA), University of Navarra , Avda. Pio XII 55, 
E-31008 Pamplona, Spain.

A novel 2D Scaffold FingerPrint (SFP) for mining ring fragments is presented. 
The rings are described not only by their topology, shape, and pharmacophoric 
features (hydrogen-bond acceptors and donors, their relative locations, sp3 
carbons, and chirality) but also by the position and nature of their growing 
vectors because they play a critical role from the drug discovery perspective. 
SFP can be used (i) to identify alternative chemotypes to a reference ring 
either in a visual mode or by running quantitative similarity searches and (ii) 
in chemotype-based diversity selections. Two retrospective case studies focused 
on melanin concentrating hormone 1-receptor antagonists (MCH-R1) and 
phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors (PDE5) demonstrate the capability of this method 
for identifying novel structurally different and synthetically accessible 
chemotypes. Good enrichment factor (155 and 219) and recall values (46% and 73%) 
are found within the first 100 ranked hits (0.3% of screened database). Our 2D 
SFP descriptor outperforms well-validated current gold-standard 2D fingerprints 
(ECFP_6) and 3D approaches based on shape and electrostatic similarity. 
Scaffold-based selection of diverse compounds has a critical impact on corporate 
library design and compound acquisitions; thus, a novel strategy is introduced 
that uses diverse scaffold selections using this SFP descriptor combined with 
R-group selection at the different substitution sites. Both approaches are 
available as part of an interactive web-based application that requires minimal 
input and no computational knowledge by medicinal chemists.

DOI: 10.1021/ci500542e
PMID: 25558803 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Cell Signal. 2015 Apr;27(4):818-27. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2015.01.008. Epub
 2015 Jan 22.

Identification of amino acids that are selectively involved in Gi/o activation 
by rat melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1.

Hamamoto A(1), Kobayashi Y(1), Saito Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Integrated Arts and Sciences, Hiroshima University, 
Hiroshima, Japan.
(2)Graduate School of Integrated Arts and Sciences, Hiroshima University, 
Hiroshima, Japan. Electronic address: yumist@hiroshima-u.ac.jp.

Many G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are known to functionally couple to 
multiple G-protein subfamily members. Although promiscuous G-protein coupling 
enables GPCRs to mediate diverse signals, only a few GPCRs have been identified 
with differential determinants for coupling to distinct Gα proteins. Mammalian 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1) couples to dual G-protein 
subfamilies. However, the selectivity mechanisms between MCHR1 and different 
subtypes of Gα proteins are unclear. Our previous studies demonstrated that 
mammalian MCHR1 couples to both Gi/o and Gq, whereas goldfish MCHR1 exclusively 
couples to Gq. In this study, we analyzed multiple sequence alignments between 
rat and goldfish MCHR1s, and designed three multisubstituted mutants of rat 
MCHR1 by replacing corresponding residues with those in goldfish MCHR1, focusing 
on regions around the cytosolic intracellular loops. By measurement of 
intracellular Ca(2+) mobilization, we found that two MCHR1 mutants, i2_6sub and 
i3_6sub, which contained six simultaneously substituted residues in the second 
intracellular loop or a combination of substituted residues in the third 
intracellular loop and fifth transmembrane domain, respectively, significantly 
reduced Gi/o-sensitive pertussis toxin responsiveness without altering 
Gq-mediated activity. Analyses of 10 other substitutions revealed that the 
multiple substitutions in i2_6sub and i3_6sub were necessary for Gi/o-selective 
responses. As judged by Gi/o-dependent GTPγS binding and cyclic AMP assays, 
i2_6sub and i3_6sub elicited phenotypes for impaired Gi/o-mediated signaling. We 
also monitored the dynamic mass redistribution (DMR) in living cells, which 
reveals receptor activity as an optical trace containing activation of all GPCR 
coupling classes. Cells transfected with i2_6sub or i3_6sub exhibited reduced 
Gi/o-mediated DMR responses compared with those transfected with MCHR1. These 
data suggest that two different regions independently affect the Gi/o-protein 
preference, and that multiple residues comprise a conformation favoring 
Gi/o-protein coupling and subsequently result in Gi/o-selective signaling.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2015.01.008
PMID: 25617691 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2015 Jul 15;25(14):2793-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2015.05.008. Epub 2015 May 15.

Dihydropyrrolopyrazol-6-one MCHR1 antagonists for the treatment of obesity: 
Insights on in vivo efficacy from a novel FLIPR assay setup.

Devasthale P(1), Wang W(2), Hernandez AS(2), Moore F(2), Renduchintala K(3), 
Sridhar R(3), Pelleymounter MA(4), Longhi D(4), Huang N(4), Flynn N(4), Azzara 
AV(4), Rohrbach K(4), Devenny J(4), Rooney S(4), Thomas M(4), Glick S(4), 
Godonis H(4), Harvey S(4), Cullen MJ(4), Zhang H(5), Caporuscio C(5), Stetsko 
P(5), Grubb M(5), Huang C(5), Zhang L(5), Freeden C(5), Li YX(5), Murphy BJ(4), 
Robl JA(2), Washburn WN(2).

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Diseases Chemistry, Bristol-Myers Squibb Research and Development, 
Princeton, NJ 08543-5400, United States. Electronic address: 
pratik.devasthale@bms.com.
(2)Metabolic Diseases Chemistry, Bristol-Myers Squibb Research and Development, 
Princeton, NJ 08543-5400, United States.
(3)BMS-Biocon Research Center, Biocon, 20th KM, Hosur Road, Electronic City, 
Bangalore 560 100, India.
(4)Metabolic Diseases Biology, Bristol-Myers Squibb Research and Development, 
Princeton, NJ 08543-5400, United States.
(5)Pharmaceutical Candidate Optimization, Bristol-Myers Squibb Research and 
Development, Princeton, NJ 08543-5400, United States.

Our investigation of the structure-activity and structure-liability 
relationships for dihydropyrrolopyrazol-6-one MCHR1 antagonists revealed that 
off-rate characteristics, inferred from potencies in a FLIPR assay following a 2 
h incubation, can impact in vivo efficacy. The in vitro and exposure profiles of 
dihydropyrrolopyrazol-6-ones 1b and 1e were comparable to that of the 
thienopyrimidinone counterparts 41 and 43 except for a much faster MCHR1 
apparent off-rate. The greatly diminished dihydropyrrolopyrazol-6-one 
anti-obesity response may be the consequence of this rapid off-rate.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2015.05.008
PMID: 26022839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2015 Aug;135:154-68. doi:
10.1016/j.pbb.2015.05.018.  Epub 2015 Jun 2.

Antidepressant/anxiolytic potential and adverse effect liabilities of 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 antagonists in animal models.

Chaki S(1), Shimazaki T(2), Nishiguchi M(2), Funakoshi T(2), Iijima M(2), Ito 
A(2), Kanuma K(2), Sekiguchi Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Taisho Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., 1-403 Yoshino-cho, Kita-ku, Saitama, Saitama 
331-9530, Japan. Electronic address: s-chaki@so.taisho.co.jp.
(2)Taisho Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., 1-403 Yoshino-cho, Kita-ku, Saitama, Saitama 
331-9530, Japan.

Melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCH1 receptor) is known to be involved 
in the control of mood and stress, in addition to the regulation of feeding. 
Here, we report further evidence that the blockade of the MCH1 receptor exhibits 
antidepressant and anxiolytic-like effects in a variety of animal models using 
TASP0382650 and TASP0489838, newly synthesized MCH1 receptor antagonists, with 
different scaffolds. Both TASP0382650 and TASP0489838 exhibited high affinities 
for human MCH1 receptor with IC50 values of 7.13 and 3.80nM, respectively. Both 
compounds showed potent antagonist activities at the MCH1 receptor, as assessed 
using MCH-increased [(35)S]GTPγS binding to human MCH1 receptor and an 
MCH-induced [Ca(2+)]i assay in rat MCH1 receptor expressing cells. In contrast, 
neither TASP0382650 nor TASP0489838 showed an affinity for the MCH2 receptor, 
another MCH receptor subtype. The oral administration of TASP0382650 or 
TASP0489838 significantly reduced the immobility time during the forced swimming 
test in rats, and reduced hyperemotionality induced by an olfactory bulbectomy, 
both of which are indicative of an antidepressant-like potential. In the 
olfactory bulbectomy model, the antidepressant effect of TASP0382650 appeared 
following a single administration, suggesting a faster onset of action, compared 
with current medications. Moreover, both TASP0382650 and TASP0489838 exhibited 
anxiolytic effects in several animal models of anxiety. In contrast, both 
TASP0382650 and TASP0489838 did not affect spontaneous locomotor activity, motor 
function, spatial memory during the Morris water maze task, or the convulsion 
threshold to pentylenetetrazole. These findings provide additional evidence that 
the blockade of the MCH1 receptor exhibits antidepressant- and anxiolytic 
activities with no adverse effects in experimental animal models.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pbb.2015.05.018
PMID: 26044968 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Physiol Behav. 2015 Dec 1;152(Pt B):402-7. doi:
10.1016/j.physbeh.2015.05.037.  Epub 2015 Jun 3.

Deletion of Melanin Concentrating Hormone Receptor-1 disrupts overeating in the 
presence of food cues.

Sherwood A(1), Holland PC(1), Adamantidis A(2), Johnson AW(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, MD 21218, United States.
(2)Douglas Hospital Research Centre, Department of Psychiatry, McGill 
University, 6875 LaSalle Boulevard, Montreal, Canada.
(3)Department of Psychology and Neuroscience Program, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, MI 48824, United States. Electronic address: awj@msu.edu.

Exposure to environmental cues associated with food can evoke eating behavior in 
the absence of hunger. This capacity for reward cues to promote feeding 
behaviors under sated conditions can be examined in the laboratory using 
cue-potentiated feeding (CPF). The orexigenic neuropeptide Melanin Concentrating 
Hormone (MCH) is expressed throughout brain circuitry critical for CPF. We 
examined whether deletion of the MCH receptor, MCH-1R, would in KO mice disrupt 
overeating in the presence of a Pavlovian CS+ associated with sucrose delivery. 
While both wild-type controls and KO mice showed comparable food magazine 
approach responses during the CPF test, MCH-1R deletion significantly impaired 
the ability of the CS+ to evoke overeating of sucrose under satiety. Through the 
use of a refined analysis of meal intake, it was revealed that this disruption 
to overeating behavior in KO mice reflected a reduction in the capacity for the 
CS+ to initiate and maintain bursts of licking behavior. These findings suggest 
that overeating during CPF requires intact MCH-1R signaling and may be due to an 
influence of the CS+ on the palatability of food and on regulatory mechanisms of 
peripheral control. Thus, disruptions to MCH-1R signaling may be a useful 
pharmacological tool to inhibit this form of overeating behavior.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2015.05.037
PMID: 26048303 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2015 Aug 15;25(16):3270-4. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2015.05.074. Epub 2015 May 30.

Design, synthesis and evaluation of MCH receptor 1 antagonists--Part II: 
Optimization of pyridazines toward reduced phospholipidosis and hERG inhibition.

Roth GJ(1), Heckel A(2), Kley JT(2), Lehmann T(2), Müller SG(2), Oost T(2), 
Rudolf K(2), Arndt K(3), Budzinski R(3), Lenter M(3), Lotz RR(4), Schindler 
M(3), Thomas L(3), Stenkamp D(2).

Author information:
(1)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Department of Medicinal Chemistry, 
Research Germany, Birkendorfer Str. 65, 88397 Biberach an der Riss, Germany. 
Electronic address: geraldroth@boehringer-ingelheim.com.
(2)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Department of Medicinal Chemistry, 
Research Germany, Birkendorfer Str. 65, 88397 Biberach an der Riss, Germany.
(3)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Department of Cardiometabolic 
Research, Research Germany, Birkendorfer Str. 65, 88397 Biberach an der Riss, 
Germany.
(4)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Department of Drug Discovery 
Support, Research Germany, Birkendorfer Str. 65, 88397 Biberach an der Riss, 
Germany.

Despite recent success there remains a high therapeutic need for the development 
of drugs targeting diseases associated with the metabolic syndrome. As part of 
our search for safe and effective MCH-R1 antagonists for the treatment of 
obesity, a series of 3,6-disubstituted pyridazines was evaluated. During 
optimization several issues of the initial lead structures had to be resolved, 
such as selectivity over related GPCRs, inhibition of the hERG channel as well 
as the potential to induce phospholipidosis. Utilizing property-based design, we 
could demonstrate that all parameters can significantly be improved by 
consequently increasing the polarity of the compounds. By this strategy, we 
succeeded in identifying potent and orally available MCH-R1 antagonists with 
good selectivity over M1 and 5-HT2A and an improved safety profile with respect 
to hERG inhibition and phospholipidosis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2015.05.074
PMID: 26077492 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2015 Aug 15;25(16):3275-80. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2015.05.065. Epub 2015 May 29.

Design, synthesis and evaluation of MCH receptor 1 antagonists--Part III: 
Discovery of pre-clinical development candidate BI 186908.

Oost T(1), Heckel A(2), Kley JT(2), Lehmann T(2), Müller S(2), Roth GJ(2), 
Rudolf K(2), Arndt K(3), Budzinski R(3), Lenter M(3), Lotz RR(4), Maier GM(4), 
Markert M(4), Thomas L(3), Stenkamp D(2).

Author information:
(1)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Department of Medicinal Chemistry, 
Research Germany, Birkendorfer Str. 65, 88397 Biberach an der Riss, Germany. 
Electronic address: thorsten.oost@boehringer-ingelheim.com.
(2)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Department of Medicinal Chemistry, 
Research Germany, Birkendorfer Str. 65, 88397 Biberach an der Riss, Germany.
(3)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Department of Cardiometabolic 
Research, Research Germany, Birkendorfer Str. 65, 88397 Biberach an der Riss, 
Germany.
(4)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Department of Drug Discovery 
Support, Research Germany, Birkendorfer Str. 65, 88397 Biberach an der Riss, 
Germany.

Although overweight and obesity are highly prevalent conditions, options to 
treat them are still very limited. As part of our search for safe and effective 
MCH-R1 antagonists for the treatment of obesity, two series of pyridones and 
pyridazinones were evaluated. Optimization was aimed at improving DMPK 
properties by increasing metabolic stability and improving the safety profile by 
reducing inhibition of the hERG channel and reducing the potential to induce 
phospholipidosis. Steric shielding of a labile keto moiety with an ortho-methyl 
group and fine-tuning of the polarity in several parts of the molecule resulted 
in BI 186908 (11 g), a potent and selective MCH-R1 antagonist with favorable 
DMPK and CMC properties. Chronic administration of BI 186908 resulted in 
significant body weight reduction comparable to sibutramine in a 4 week 
diet-induced obesity model in rats. Based on its favorable safety profile, BI 
186908 was advanced to pre-clinical development.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2015.05.065
PMID: 26105194 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2015 Aug 15;25(16):3264-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2015.05.077. Epub 2015 Jun 6.

Design, synthesis and evaluation of MCH receptor 1 antagonists--Part I: 
Optimization of HTS hits towards an in vivo efficacious tool compound BI 414.

Müller SG(1), Heckel A(2), Kley JT(2), Lehmann T(2), Lustenberger P(2), Oost 
T(2), Roth GJ(2), Rudolf K(2), Arndt K(3), Lenter M(3), Lotz RR(4), Maier GM(4), 
Markert M(4), Schindler M(3), Stenkamp D(2).

Author information:
(1)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Department of Medicinal Chemistry, 
Birkendorfer Str. 65, 88397 Biberach an der Riss, Germany. Electronic address: 
stephan_georg.mueller@boehringer-ingelheim.com.
(2)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Department of Medicinal Chemistry, 
Birkendorfer Str. 65, 88397 Biberach an der Riss, Germany.
(3)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Department of Cardiometabolic 
Research, Birkendorfer Str. 65, 88397 Biberach an der Riss, Germany.
(4)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Department of Drug Discovery 
Support Research Germany, Birkendorfer Str. 65, 88397 Biberach an der Riss, 
Germany.

Despite recent approvals of anti-obesity drugs there is still a high therapeutic 
need for alternative options with higher efficacy in humans. As part of our 
MCH-R1 antagonist program for the treatment of obesity, a series of 
biphenylacetamide HTS hits was evaluated. Several issues of the initial lead 
structures had to be resolved, such as potency, selectivity over related GPCRs 
and P-gp efflux limiting brain exposure in this series. We could demonstrate 
that all parameters can be significantly improved by structural modifications 
resulting in BI 414 as a potent and orally available MCH-R1 antagonist tool 
compound with acceptable in vivo efficacy in an animal model of obesity.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2015.05.077
PMID: 26112443 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2015 Oct 15;25(20):4412-8. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2015.09.018. Epub 2015 Sep 8.

Non-basic azolotriazinone MCHR1 antagonists for the treatment of obesity: An 
empirical brain-exposures-driven candidate selection for in vivo efficacy 
studies.

Devasthale P(1), Wang W(2), Mignone J(2), Renduchintala K(3), Radhakrishnan 
S(3), Dhanapal J(3), Selvaraj J(3), Kuppusamy R(3), Pelleymounter MA(4), Longhi 
D(4), Huang N(4), Flynn N(4), Azzara AV(4), Rohrbach K(4), Devenny J(4), Rooney 
S(4), Thomas M(4), Glick S(4), Godonis H(4), Harvey S(4), Cullen MJ(4), Zhang 
H(5), Caporuscio C(5), Stetsko P(4), Grubb M(4), Huang C(4), Zhang L(4), Freeden 
C(4), Murphy BJ(4), Robl JA(2), Washburn WN(2).

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Diseases Chemistry, Bristol-Myers Squibb Research and Development, 
Princeton, NJ 08543-5400, United States. Electronic address: 
pratik.devasthale@bms.com.
(2)Metabolic Diseases Chemistry, Bristol-Myers Squibb Research and Development, 
Princeton, NJ 08543-5400, United States.
(3)BMS-Biocon Research Center, Biocon, 20th KM, Hosur Road, Electronic City, 
Bangalore 560 100, India.
(4)Metabolic Diseases Biology, Bristol-Myers Squibb Research and Development, 
Princeton, NJ 08543-5400, United States.
(5)Pharmaceutical Candidate Optimization, Bristol-Myers Squibb Research and 
Development, Princeton, NJ 08543-5400, United States.

Non-basic azolotriazinones were explored using an empirical free brain 
exposures-driven approach to identify potent MCHR1 antagonists for evaluation in 
in vivo efficacy studies. An optimized lead from this series, 1j (rMCHR1 Ki=1.8 
nM), demonstrated a 6.9% reduction in weight gain relative to vehicle in a rat 
model at 30 mg/kg after 4 days of once-daily oral treatment as a glycine 
prodrug. Despite a promising efficacy profile, an assessment of the biliary 
toxicity risk of this compound rendered this compound non-progressible.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2015.09.018
PMID: 26386604 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Peptides. 2015 Dec;74:9-15. doi: 10.1016/j.peptides.2015.10.001. Epub 2015
Oct  9.

MCH levels in the CSF, brain preproMCH and MCHR1 gene expression during 
paradoxical sleep deprivation, sleep rebound and chronic sleep restriction.

Dias Abdo Agamme AL(1), Aguilar Calegare BF(1), Fernandes L(1), Costa A(2), 
Lagos P(2), Torterolo P(3), D'Almeida V(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychobiology, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, 
Brazil.
(2)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, Universidad de la República, 
Montevideo, Uruguay.
(3)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, Universidad de la República, 
Montevideo, Uruguay. Electronic address: ptortero@fmed.edu.uy.

Neurons that utilize melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) as neuromodulator are 
located in the lateral hypothalamus and incerto-hypothalamic area. These neurons 
project throughout the central nervous system and play a role in sleep 
regulation. With the hypothesis that the MCHergic system function would be 
modified by the time of the day as well as by disruptions of the sleep-wake 
cycle, we quantified in rats the concentration of MCH in the cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF), the expression of the MCH precursor (Pmch) gene in the hypothalamus, and 
the expression of the MCH receptor 1 (Mchr1) gene in the frontal cortex and 
hippocampus. These analyses were performed during paradoxical sleep deprivation 
(by a modified multiple platform technique), paradoxical sleep rebound and 
chronic sleep restriction, both at the end of the active (dark) phase (lights 
were turned on at Zeitgeber time zero, ZT0) and during the inactive (light) 
phase (ZT8). We observed that in control condition (waking and sleep ad 
libitum), Mchr1 gene expression was larger at ZT8 (when sleep predominates) than 
at ZT0, both in frontal cortex and hippocampus. In addition, compared to 
control, disturbances of the sleep-wake cycle produced the following effects: 
paradoxical sleep deprivation for 96 and 120 h reduced the expression of Mchr1 
gene in frontal cortex at ZT0. Sleep rebound that followed 96 h of paradoxical 
sleep deprivation increased the MCH concentration in the CSF also at ZT0. 
Twenty-one days of sleep restriction produced a significant increment in MCH CSF 
levels at ZT8. Finally, sleep disruptions unveiled day/night differences in MCH 
CSF levels and in Pmch gene expression that were not observed in control 
(undisturbed) conditions. In conclusion, the time of the day and sleep 
disruptions produced subtle modifications in the physiology of the MCHergic 
system.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.peptides.2015.10.001
PMID: 26456505 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


335. J Med Chem. 2016 Feb 11;59(3):1116-39. doi: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.5b01704.
Epub  2016 Jan 22.

Melanin-Concentrating Hormone Receptor 1 Antagonists Lacking an Aliphatic Amine: 
Synthesis and Structure-Activity Relationships of Novel 
1-(Imidazo[1,2-a]pyridin-6-yl)pyridin-2(1H)-one Derivatives.

Igawa H(1), Takahashi M(1), Kakegawa K(1), Kina A(1), Ikoma M(1), Aida J(1), 
Yasuma T(2), Kawata Y(1), Ashina S(1), Yamamoto S(1), Kundu M(3), Khamrai U(3), 
Hirabayashi H(1), Nakayama M(1), Nagisa Y(4), Kasai S(1), Maekawa T(1).

Author information:
(1)Pharmaceutical Research Division, Takeda Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Shonan 
Research Center , 26-1, Muraoka-Higashi 2-Chome, Fujisawa, Kanagawa 251-8555, 
Japan.
(2)CMC Center, Takeda Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. , 17-85, Jusohonmachi 2-Chome, 
Yodogawa-ku, Osaka 532-8686, Japan.
(3)TCG Lifesciences Ltd. , Block BN, Plot 7, Saltlake Electronics Complex, 
Sector V, Kolkata 700091, India.
(4)CVM Marketing Japan Pharma Business Unit, Takeda Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. 
12-10, Nihonbashi 2-Chome, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 103-8686, Japan.

Erratum in
    J Med Chem. 2016 Apr 14;59(7):3577.

Aiming to discover melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1) antagonists 
with improved safety profiles, we hypothesized that the aliphatic amine employed 
in most antagonists reported to date could be removed if the bicyclic motif of 
the compound scaffold interacted with Asp123 and/or Tyr272 of MCHR1. We excluded 
aliphatic amines from our compound designs, with a cutoff value of pK(a) < 8, 
and explored aliphatic amine-free MCHR1 antagonists in a CNS-oriented chemical 
space limited by four descriptors (TPSA, ClogP, MW, and HBD count). Screening of 
novel bicyclic motifs with high intrinsic binding affinity for MCHR1 identified 
the imidazo[1,2-a]pyridine ring (represented in compounds 6a and 6b), and 
subsequent cyclization of the central aliphatic amide linkage led to the 
discovery of a potent, orally bioavailable MCHR1 antagonist 
4-[(4-chlorobenzyl)oxy]-1-(2-cyclopropyl-3-methylimidazo[1,2-a]pyridin-6-yl)pyridin-2(1H)-one 
10a. It exhibited low potential for hERG inhibition and phospholipidosis 
induction as well as sufficient brain concentration to exert antiobesity effects 
in diet-induced obese rats.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.5b01704
PMID: 26736071 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


336. J Med Chem. 2016 Mar 24;59(6):2497-511. doi: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.5b01654.
Epub  2016 Feb 5.

Discovery of 
(3-(4-(2-Oxa-6-azaspiro[3.3]heptan-6-ylmethyl)phenoxy)azetidin-1-yl)(5-(4-methoxyphenyl)-1,3,4-oxadiazol-2-yl)methanone 
(AZD1979), a Melanin Concentrating Hormone Receptor 1 (MCHr1) Antagonist with 
Favorable Physicochemical Properties.

Johansson A(1), Löfberg C(1), Antonsson M(1), von Unge S(1), Hayes MA(1), 
Judkins R(1), Ploj K(1), Benthem L(1), Lindén D(1), Brodin P(1), Wennerberg 
M(1), Fredenwall M(1), Li L(1), Persson J(1), Bergman R(1), Pettersen A(1), 
Gennemark P(1), Hogner A(1).

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular & Metabolic Diseases iMed and ‡Global Medicines Development, 
AstraZeneca Gothenburg , 431 83 Mölndal, Sweden.

A novel series of melanin concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHr1) antagonists 
were the starting point for a drug discovery program that culminated in the 
discovery of 103 (AZD1979). The lead optimization program was conducted with a 
focus on reducing lipophilicity and understanding the physicochemical properties 
governing CNS exposure and undesired off-target pharmacology such as hERG 
interactions. An integrated approach was taken where the key assay was ex vivo 
receptor occupancy in mice. The candidate compound 103 displayed appropriate 
lipophilicity for a CNS indication and showed excellent permeability with no 
efflux. Preclinical GLP toxicology and safety pharmacology studies were without 
major findings and 103 was taken into clinical trials.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.5b01654
PMID: 26741166 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Cell Signal. 2016 Jun;28(6):572-84. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2016.02.018. Epub
 2016 Mar 2.

Modulation of primary cilia length by melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1.

Hamamoto A(1), Yamato S(1), Katoh Y(2), Nakayama K(2), Yoshimura K(3), Takeda 
S(3), Kobayashi Y(1), Saito Y(4).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Integrated Arts and Sciences, Hiroshima University, 
Hiroshima 739-8521, Japan.
(2)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8501, 
Japan.
(3)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Interdisciplinary Graduate School of 
Medicine and Engineering, University of Yamanashi, Yamanashi 409-3898, Japan.
(4)Graduate School of Integrated Arts and Sciences, Hiroshima University, 
Hiroshima 739-8521, Japan. Electronic address: yumist@hiroshima-u.ac.jp.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) receptor 1 (MCHR1) is a class A 
G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR). The MCH-MCHR1 system has been implicated in 
the regulation of feeding, emotional processing, and sleep in rodents. Recent 
work revealed that MCHR1 is selectively expressed in neuronal primary cilia of 
the central nervous system. Cilia have various chemosensory functions in many 
types of cell, and ciliary dysfunction is associated with ciliopathies such as 
polycystic kidney disease and obesity. Although dynamic modulation of neuronal 
cilia length is observed in obese mice, the functional interaction of neuronal 
ciliary GPCR and its endogenous ligand has not yet been elucidated. We report 
here that MCH treatment significantly reduced cilia length in hTERT-RPE1 cells 
(hRPE1 cells) transfected with MCHR1. Quantitative analyses indicated that 
MCH-induced cilia shortening progressed in a dose-dependent manner with an EC50 
lower than 1nM when cells were treated for 6h. Although the assembly and 
disassembly of primary cilia are tightly coupled to the cell cycle, cell cycle 
reentry was not a determinant of MCH-induced cilia shortening. We confirmed that 
MCH elicited receptor internalization, Ca(2+) mobilization, ERK and Akt 
phosphorylation, and inhibition of cyclic AMP accumulation in MCHR1-expressing 
hRPE1 cells. Among these diverse pathways, we revealed that Gi/o-dependent Akt 
phosphorylation was an important component in the initial stage of MCH-induced 
cilia length shortening. Furthermore, induction of fewer cilia by Kif3A siRNA 
treatment significantly decreased the MCH-mediated phosphorylation of Akt, 
indicating the functional importance of the MCHR1-Akt pathway in primary cilia. 
Taken together, the present data suggest that the MCH-MCHR1 axis may modulate 
the sensitivity of cells to external environments by controlling the cilia 
length. Therefore, further characterization of MCHR1 as a ciliary GPCR will 
provide a potential molecular mechanism to link cilia length control with 
obesity.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2016.02.018
PMID: 26946173 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


338. EJNMMI Res. 2016 Dec;6(1):31. doi: 10.1186/s13550-016-0186-7. Epub 2016 Apr
1.

[(18)F]FE@SNAP-a specific PET tracer for melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 
1 imaging?

Philippe C(1)(2), Haeusler D(1), Scherer T(3), Fürnsinn C(3), Zeilinger M(1), 
Wadsak W(1), Shanab K(4), Spreitzer H(4), Hacker M(1), Mitterhauser M(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Imaging and Image-guided Therapy, Division of 
Nuclear Medicine, Medical University of Vienna, Waehringer Guertel 18-20, 1090, 
Vienna, Austria.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Technology and Biopharmaceutics, University of 
Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(3)Department of Medicine III, Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Medical 
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(4)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of Vienna, Vienna, 
Austria.
(5)Department of Biomedical Imaging and Image-guided Therapy, Division of 
Nuclear Medicine, Medical University of Vienna, Waehringer Guertel 18-20, 1090, 
Vienna, Austria. markus.mitterhauser@meduniwien.ac.at.
(6)Department of Pharmaceutical Technology and Biopharmaceutics, University of 
Vienna, Vienna, Austria. markus.mitterhauser@meduniwien.ac.at.
(7)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Applied Diagnostics, Vienna, Austria. 
markus.mitterhauser@meduniwien.ac.at.

BACKGROUND: The melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1), which is 
highly expressed in the lateral hypothalamus, plays a key role in energy 
homeostasis, obesity and other endocrine diseases. Hence, there is a major 
interest in in vivo imaging of this receptor. A PET tracer would allow 
non-invasive in vivo visualization and quantification of the MCHR1. The aim of 
the study was the ex vivo evaluation of the MCHR1 ligand [(18)F]FE@SNAP as a 
potential PET tracer for the MCHR1.
METHODS: [(18)F]FE@SNAP was injected directly into the jugular vein of awake 
naïve rats for ex vivo brain autoradiography, biodistribution and additional 
blood metabolite analysis. Blocking experiments were conducted using the 
unlabeled MCHR1 ligand SNAP-7941.
RESULTS: A high uptake of [(18)F]FE@SNAP was observed in the lateral 
hypothalamus and the ventricular system. Both regions were significantly blocked 
by SNAP-7941. Biodistribution evinced the highest uptake in the kidneys, 
adrenals, lung and duodenum. Specific blocking with SNAP-7941 led to a 
significant tracer reduction in the heart and adrenals. In plasma samples, 
47.73 ± 6.1 % of a hydrophilic radioactive metabolite was found 45 min after 
tracer injection.
CONCLUSIONS: Since [(18)F]FE@SNAP uptake was significantly blocked in the 
lateral hypothalamus, there is strong evidence that [(18)F]FE@SNAP is a highly 
suitable agent for specific MCHR1 imaging in the central nervous system. 
Additionally, this finding is supported by the specific blocking in the 
ventricular system, where the MCHR1 is expressed in the ependymal cells. These 
findings suggest that [(18)F]FE@SNAP could serve as a useful imaging and therapy 
monitoring tool for MCHR1-related pathologies.

DOI: 10.1186/s13550-016-0186-7
PMCID: PMC4816952
PMID: 27033361


339. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2016 Jun;233(12):2355-63. doi: 
10.1007/s00213-016-4285-y. Epub 2016 Apr 5.

The melanin-concentrating hormone-1 receptor modulates alcohol-induced reward 
and DARPP-32 phosphorylation.

Karlsson C(1), Rehman F(2), Damadzic R(2), Atkins AL(1), Schank JR(3), Gehlert 
DR(4), Steensland P(5), Thorsell A(1), Heilig M(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Linkopings University, 
Linkoping, Sweden.
(2)Laboratory of Clinical and Translational Studies, National Institute on 
Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA), National Institutes of Health (NIH), 
Bethesda, MD, USA.
(3)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, 
USA.
(4)Neuroscience and Endocrine Discovery Research, Lilly Research Laboratories, a 
Division of Eli Lilly and Company, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(5)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(6)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Linkopings University, 
Linkoping, Sweden. markus.heilig@liu.se.

Erratum in
    Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2016 Oct;233(21-22):3825. Damdazic, Ruslan 
[corrected to Damadzic, Ruslan].

RATIONALE: Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is involved in the regulation of 
food intake and has recently been associated with alcohol-related behaviors. 
Blockade of MCH-1 receptors (MCH1-Rs) attenuates operant alcohol 
self-administration and decreases cue-induced reinstatement, but the mechanism 
through which the MCH1-R influences these behaviors remains unknown. MCH1-Rs are 
highly expressed in the nucleus accumbens shell (NAcSh) where they are 
co-expressed with dopamine (DA) receptors. MCH has been shown to potentiate 
responses to dopamine and to increase phosphorylation of DARPP-32, an 
intracellular marker of DA receptor activation, in the NAcSh.
METHODS: In the present study, we investigated the role of the MCH1-R in alcohol 
reward using the conditioned place preference (CPP) paradigm. We then used 
immunohistochemistry (IHC) to assess activation of downstream signaling after 
administration of a rewarding dose of alcohol.
RESULTS: We found that alcohol-induced CPP was markedly decreased in mice with a 
genetic deletion of the MCH1-R as well as after pharmacological treatment with 
an MCH1-R antagonist, GW803430. In contrast, an isocaloric dose of dextrose did 
not produce CPP. The increase in DARPP-32 phosphorylation seen in wildtype (WT) 
mice after acute alcohol administration in the NAcSh was markedly reduced in 
MCH1-R knock-out (KO) mice.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that MCH1-Rs regulate the rewarding properties 
of alcohol through interactions with signaling cascades downstream of DA 
receptors in the NAcSh.

DOI: 10.1007/s00213-016-4285-y
PMID: 27044354 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Int J Mol Sci. 2016 Apr 6;17(4):501. doi: 10.3390/ijms17040501.

Genome-Wide Mapping of Growth-Related Quantitative Trait Loci in Orange-Spotted 
Grouper (Epinephelus coioides) Using Double Digest Restriction-Site Associated 
DNA Sequencing (ddRADseq).

Yu H(1)(2), You X(3)(4), Li J(5)(6), Liu H(7), Meng Z(8), Xiao L(9), Zhang 
H(10), Lin HR(11)(12), Zhang Y(13)(14)(15), Shi Q(16)(17)(18).

Author information:
(1)BGI Education Center, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen 
518083, China. yuhui@genomics.cn.
(2)Shenzhen Key Lab of Marine Genomics, Guangdong Provincial Key Lab of 
Molecular Breeding in Marine Economic Animals, State Key Laboratory of 
Agricultural Genomics, BGI, Shenzhen 518083, China. yuhui@genomics.cn.
(3)Shenzhen Key Lab of Marine Genomics, Guangdong Provincial Key Lab of 
Molecular Breeding in Marine Economic Animals, State Key Laboratory of 
Agricultural Genomics, BGI, Shenzhen 518083, China. youxinxin@genomics.cn.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, Institute of Aquatic Economic Animals and 
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory for Aquatic Economic Animals, School of Life 
Sciences, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou 510275, China. 
youxinxin@genomics.cn.
(5)BGI Education Center, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen 
518083, China. lijia1@genomics.cn.
(6)Shenzhen Key Lab of Marine Genomics, Guangdong Provincial Key Lab of 
Molecular Breeding in Marine Economic Animals, State Key Laboratory of 
Agricultural Genomics, BGI, Shenzhen 518083, China. lijia1@genomics.cn.
(7)Shenzhen Key Lab of Marine Genomics, Guangdong Provincial Key Lab of 
Molecular Breeding in Marine Economic Animals, State Key Laboratory of 
Agricultural Genomics, BGI, Shenzhen 518083, China. liuhankui@genomics.cn.
(8)State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, Institute of Aquatic Economic Animals and 
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory for Aquatic Economic Animals, School of Life 
Sciences, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou 510275, China. 
mengzn@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
(9)State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, Institute of Aquatic Economic Animals and 
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory for Aquatic Economic Animals, School of Life 
Sciences, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou 510275, China. xiaoling459@126.com.
(10)Marine Fisheries Development Center of Guangdong Province, Huizhou 510610, 
China. zhhaifa812@hotmail.com.
(11)State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, Institute of Aquatic Economic Animals 
and Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory for Aquatic Economic Animals, School of 
Life Sciences, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou 510275, China. 
lsslhr@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
(12)South China Sea Bio-Resource Exploitation and Utilization Collaborative 
Innovation Center, Guangzhou 510275, China. lsslhr@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
(13)State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, Institute of Aquatic Economic Animals 
and Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory for Aquatic Economic Animals, School of 
Life Sciences, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou 510275, China. 
lsszy@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
(14)Marine Fisheries Development Center of Guangdong Province, Huizhou 510610, 
China. lsszy@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
(15)South China Sea Bio-Resource Exploitation and Utilization Collaborative 
Innovation Center, Guangzhou 510275, China. lsszy@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
(16)BGI Education Center, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen 
518083, China. shiqiong@genomics.cn.
(17)Shenzhen Key Lab of Marine Genomics, Guangdong Provincial Key Lab of 
Molecular Breeding in Marine Economic Animals, State Key Laboratory of 
Agricultural Genomics, BGI, Shenzhen 518083, China. shiqiong@genomics.cn.
(18)College of Life Sciences, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, China. 
shiqiong@genomics.cn.

Mapping of quantitative trait loci (QTL) is essential for the discovery of 
genetic structures that related to complex quantitative traits. In this study, 
we identified 264,072 raw SNPs (single-nucleotide polymorphisms) by double 
digest restriction site associated DNA sequencing (ddRADseq), and utilized 3029 
of these SNPs to construct a genetic linkage map in orange-spotted grouper 
(Epinephelus coioides) using a regression mapping algorithm. The genetic map 
contained 24 linkage groups (LGs) spanning a total genetic distance of 1231.98 
cM. Twenty-seven significant growth-related QTLs were identified. Furthermore, 
we identified 17 genes (fez2, alg3, ece2, arvcf, sla27a4, sgk223, camk2, prrc2b, 
mchr1, sardh, pappa, syk, tert, wdrcp91, ftz-f1, mate1 and notch1) including 
three (tert, ftz-f1 and notch1) that have been reported to be involved in fish 
growth. To summarize, we mapped growth-related QTLs in the orange-spotted 
grouper. These QTLs will be useful in marker-assisted selection (MAS) efforts to 
improve growth-related traits in this economically important fish.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms17040501
PMCID: PMC4848957
PMID: 27058532 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Bioorg Med Chem. 2016 Jun 1;24(11):2486-503. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2016.04.011.
 Epub 2016 Apr 6.

Amine-free melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 antagonists: Novel 
1-(1H-benzimidazol-6-yl)pyridin-2(1H)-one derivatives and design to avoid CYP3A4 
time-dependent inhibition.

Igawa H(1), Takahashi M(2), Shirasaki M(2), Kakegawa K(2), Kina A(2), Ikoma 
M(2), Aida J(2), Yasuma T(3), Okuda S(2), Kawata Y(2), Noguchi T(2), Yamamoto 
S(2), Fujioka Y(2), Kundu M(4), Khamrai U(4), Nakayama M(2), Nagisa Y(5), Kasai 
S(2), Maekawa T(2).

Author information:
(1)Pharmaceutical Research Division, Takeda Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Shonan 
Research Center, 26-1, Muraoka-Higashi 2-Chome, Fujisawa, Kanagawa 251-8555, 
Japan. Electronic address: hideyuki.igawa@takeda.com.
(2)Pharmaceutical Research Division, Takeda Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Shonan 
Research Center, 26-1, Muraoka-Higashi 2-Chome, Fujisawa, Kanagawa 251-8555, 
Japan.
(3)CMC Center, Takeda Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., 17-85, Jusohonmachi 2-Chome, 
Yodogawa-ku, Osaka 532-8686, Japan.
(4)TCG Lifesciences Ltd., Block BN, Plot 7, Saltlake Electronics Complex, Sector 
V, Kolkata 700091, India.
(5)CVM Marketing Japan Pharma Business Unit, Takeda Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., 
12-10, Nihonbashi 2-Chome, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 103-8686, Japan.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is an attractive target for antiobesity 
agents, and numerous drug discovery programs are dedicated to finding 
small-molecule MCH receptor 1 (MCHR1) antagonists. We recently reported novel 
pyridine-2(1H)-ones as aliphatic amine-free MCHR1 antagonists that structurally 
featured an imidazo[1,2-a]pyridine-based bicyclic motif. To investigate 
imidazopyridine variants with lower basicity and less potential to inhibit 
cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4), we designed pyridine-2(1H)-ones bearing various 
less basic bicyclic motifs. Among these, a lead compound 6a bearing a 
1H-benzimidazole motif showed comparable binding affinity to MCHR1 to the 
corresponding imidazopyridine derivative 1. Optimization of 6a afforded a series 
of potent thiophene derivatives (6q-u); however, most of these were found to 
cause time-dependent inhibition (TDI) of CYP3A4. As bioactivation of thiophenes 
to form sulfoxide or epoxide species was considered to be a major cause of 
CYP3A4 TDI, we introduced electron withdrawing groups on the thiophene and found 
that a CF3 group on the ring or a Cl adjacent to the sulfur atom helped prevent 
CYP3A4 TDI. Consequently, 
4-[(5-chlorothiophen-2-yl)methoxy]-1-(2-cyclopropyl-1-methyl-1H-benzimidazol-6-yl)pyridin-2(1H)-one 
(6s) was identified as a potent MCHR1 antagonist without the risk of CYP3A4 TDI, 
which exhibited a promising safety profile including low CYP3A4 inhibition and 
exerted significant antiobesity effects in diet-induced obese F344 rats.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmc.2016.04.011
PMID: 27112449 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Bioorg Med Chem. 2016 Jun 1;24(11):2504-18. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2016.04.013.
Epub  2016 Apr 7.

Amine-free melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 antagonists: Novel non-basic 
1-(2H-indazole-5-yl)pyridin-2(1H)-one derivatives and mitigation of mutagenicity 
in Ames test.

Igawa H(1), Takahashi M(2), Ikoma M(2), Kaku H(2), Kakegawa K(2), Kina A(2), 
Aida J(2), Okuda S(2), Kawata Y(2), Noguchi T(2), Hotta N(2), Yamamoto S(2), 
Nakayama M(2), Nagisa Y(3), Kasai S(2), Maekawa T(2).

Author information:
(1)Pharmaceutical Research Division, Takeda Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd, Shonan 
Research Center, 26-1, Muraoka-Higashi 2-Chome, Fujisawa, Kanagawa 251-8555, 
Japan. Electronic address: hideyuki.igawa@takeda.com.
(2)Pharmaceutical Research Division, Takeda Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd, Shonan 
Research Center, 26-1, Muraoka-Higashi 2-Chome, Fujisawa, Kanagawa 251-8555, 
Japan.
(3)CVM Marketing Japan Pharma Business Unit, Takeda Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd, 
12-10, Nihonbashi 2-Chome, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 103-8686, Japan.

To develop non-basic melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1) 
antagonists with a high probability of target selectivity and therapeutic 
window, we explored neutral bicyclic motifs that could replace the previously 
reported imidazo[1,2-a]pyridine or 1H-benzimidazole motif. The results indicated 
that the binding affinity of a chemically neutral 2H-indazole derivative 8a with 
MCHR1 (hMCHR1: IC50=35nM) was comparable to that of the imidazopyridine and 
benzimidazole derivatives (1 and 2, respectively) reported so far. However, 8a 
was positive in the Ames test using TA1537 in S9- condition. Based on a putative 
intercalation of 8a with DNA, we introduced a sterically-hindering cyclopropyl 
group on the indazole ring to decrease planarity, which led to the discovery of 
1-(2-cyclopropyl-3-methyl-2H-indazol-5-yl)-4-{[5-(trifluoromethyl)thiophen-3-yl]methoxy}pyridin-2(1H)-one 
8l without mutagenicity in TA1537. Compound 8l exerted significant antiobesity 
effects in diet-induced obese F344 rats and exhibited promising safety profile.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmc.2016.04.013
PMID: 27117261 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Int J Obes Suppl. 2014 Jul;4(Suppl 1):S31-6. doi: 10.1038/ijosup.2014.9.
Epub  2014 Jul 8.

The melanin-concentrating hormone receptors: neuronal and non-neuronal 
functions.

Presse F(1), Conductier G(1), Rovere C(1), Nahon JL(2).

Author information:
(1)CNRS/UNS UMR 7275, Institut de Pharmacologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, 
Sophia Antipolis, Valbonne, France; University of Nice Sophia Antipolis, Nice, 
France.
(2)CNRS/UNS UMR 7275, Institut de Pharmacologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, 
Sophia Antipolis, Valbonne, France; University of Nice Sophia Antipolis, Nice, 
France; CNRS UPS 846, Station de Primatologie, Rousset-sur-Arc, France.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a cyclic peptide highly conserved in 
vertebrates and was originally identified as a skin-paling factor in Teleosts. 
In fishes, MCH also participates in the regulation of the stress-response and 
feeding behaviour. Mammalian MCH is a hypothalamic neuropeptide that displays 
multiple functions, mostly controlling feeding behaviour and energy homeostasis. 
Transgenic mouse models and pharmacological studies have shown the importance of 
the MCH system as a potential target in the treatment of appetite disorders and 
obesity as well as anxiety and psychiatric diseases. Two G-protein-coupled 
receptors (GPCRs) binding MCH have been characterized so far. The first, named 
MCH-R1 and also called SLC1, was identified through reverse pharmacology 
strategies by several groups as a cognate receptor of MCH. This receptor is 
expressed at high levels in many brain areas of rodents and primates and is also 
expressed in peripheral organs, albeit at a lower rate. A second receptor, 
designated MCH-R2, exhibited 38% identity to MCH-R1 and was identified by 
sequence analysis of the human genome. Interestingly, although MCH-R2 
orthologues were also found in fishes, dogs, ferrets and non-human primates, 
this MCH receptor gene appeared either lacking or non-functional in rodents and 
lagomorphs. Both receptors are class I GPCRs, whose main roles are to mediate 
the actions of peptides and neurotransmitters in the central nervous system. 
However, examples of action of MCH on neuronal and non-neuronal cells are 
emerging that illustrate novel MCH functions. In particular, the functionality 
of endogenously expressed MCH-R1 has been explored in human neuroblastoma cells, 
SK-N-SH and SH-SY5Y cells, and in non-neuronal cell types such as the 
ependymocytes. Indeed, we have identified mitogen-activated protein kinase 
(MAPK)-dependent or calcium-dependent signalling cascades that ultimately 
contributed to neurite outgrowth in neuroblastoma cells or to modulation of 
ciliary beating in ependymal cells. The putative role of MCH on cellular shaping 
and plasticity on one side and volume transmission on the other must be now 
considered.

DOI: 10.1038/ijosup.2014.9
PMCID: PMC4850588
PMID: 27152164


344. Sci Transl Med. 2016 Jun 1;8(341):341ra76. doi:
10.1126/scitranslmed.aad3744.

A genomic approach to therapeutic target validation identifies a 
glucose-lowering GLP1R variant protective for coronary heart disease.

Scott RA(1), Freitag DF(2), Li L(3), Chu AY(4), Surendran P(5), Young R(5), 
Grarup N(6), Stancáková A(7), Chen Y(8), Varga TV(9), Yaghootkar H(10), Luan 
J(11), Zhao JH(11), Willems SM(12), Wessel J(13), Wang S(8), Maruthur N(14), 
Michailidou K(15), Pirie A(15), van der Lee SJ(16), Gillson C(11), Al Olama 
AA(15), Amouyel P(17), Arriola L(18), Arveiler D(19), Aviles-Olmos I(20), Balkau 
B(21), Barricarte A(22), Barroso I(23), Garcia SB(15), Bis JC(24), Blankenberg 
S(25), Boehnke M(26), Boeing H(27), Boerwinkle E(28), Borecki IB(29), 
Bork-Jensen J(6), Bowden S(30), Caldas C(31), Caslake M(32); CVD50 consortium; 
Cupples LA(33), Cruchaga C(34), Czajkowski J(35), den Hoed M(36), Dunn JA(37), 
Earl HM(38), Ehret GB(39), Ferrannini E(40), Ferrieres J(41), Foltynie T(20), 
Ford I(32), Forouhi NG(11), Gianfagna F(42), Gonzalez C(43), Grioni S(44), 
Hiller L(37), Jansson JH(45), Jørgensen ME(46), Jukema JW(47), Kaaks R(48), Kee 
F(49), Kerrison ND(11), Key TJ(50), Kontto J(51), Kote-Jarai Z(52), Kraja 
AT(35), Kuulasmaa K(51), Kuusisto J(53), Linneberg A(54), Liu C(55), Marenne 
G(56), Mohlke KL(57), Morris AP(58), Muir K(59), Müller-Nurasyid M(60), Munroe 
PB(61), Navarro C(62), Nielsen SF(63), Nilsson PM(64), Nordestgaard BG(63), 
Packard CJ(32), Palli D(65), Panico S(66), Peloso GM(67), Perola M(68), Peters 
A(69), Poole CJ(70), Quirós JR(71), Rolandsson O(72), Sacerdote C(73), Salomaa 
V(51), Sánchez MJ(74), Sattar N(32), Sharp SJ(11), Sims R(75), Slimani N(76), 
Smith JA(77), Thompson DJ(15), Trompet S(47), Tumino R(78), van der A DL(79), 
van der Schouw YT(80), Virtamo J(51), Walker M(81), Walter K(56); GERAD_EC 
Consortium; Neurology Working Group of the Cohorts for Heart; Aging Research in 
Genomic Epidemiology (CHARGE); Alzheimer’s Disease Genetics Consortium; 
Pancreatic Cancer Cohort Consortium; European Prospective Investigation into 
Cancer and Nutrition–Cardiovascular Disease (EPIC-CVD); EPIC-InterAct; Abraham 
JE(82), Amundadottir LT(83), Aponte JL(84), Butterworth AS(5), Dupuis J(8), 
Easton DF(85), Eeles RA(86), Erdmann J(87), Franks PW(88), Frayling TM(10), 
Hansen T(6), Howson JM(5), Jørgensen T(89), Kooner J(90), Laakso M(91), 
Langenberg C(11), McCarthy MI(92), Pankow JS(93), Pedersen O(6), Riboli E(94), 
Rotter JI(95), Saleheen D(96), Samani NJ(97), Schunkert H(98), Vollenweider 
P(99), O'Rahilly S(100); CHARGE consortium; CHD Exome+ Consortium; CARDIOGRAM 
Exome Consortium; Deloukas P(101), Danesh J(2), Goodarzi MO(102), Kathiresan 
S(103), Meigs JB(104), Ehm MG(84), Wareham NJ(1), Waterworth DM(105).

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Council (MRC) Epidemiology Unit, University of Cambridge 
School of Clinical Medicine, Institute of Metabolic Science, Cambridge 
Biomedical Campus, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, UK. dawn.m.waterworth@gsk.com 
robert.scott@mrc-epid.cam.ac.uk nick.wareham@mrc-epid.cam.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Public Health and Primary Care, Strangeways Research 
Laboratory, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB1 8RN, UK. The Wellcome Trust 
Sanger Institute, Cambridge CB10 1SA, UK.
(3)Statistical Genetics, Projects, Clinical Platforms, and Sciences (PCPS), 
GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.
(4)Division of Preventive Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 
02115, USA.
(5)Department of Public Health and Primary Care, Strangeways Research 
Laboratory, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB1 8RN, UK.
(6)The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research, Faculty of 
Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark.
(7)Institute of Clinical Medicine, Internal Medicine, University of Eastern 
Finland, FI-70211 Kuopio, Finland.
(8)Department of Biostatistics, Boston University School of Public Health, 
Boston, MA 02118, USA.
(9)Department of Clinical Sciences, Genetic and Molecular Epidemiology Unit, 
Lund University, SE-205 Malmö, Sweden.
(10)Genetics of Complex Traits, University of Exeter Medical School, University 
of Exeter, Exeter EX1 2LU, UK.
(11)Medical Research Council (MRC) Epidemiology Unit, University of Cambridge 
School of Clinical Medicine, Institute of Metabolic Science, Cambridge 
Biomedical Campus, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, UK.
(12)Medical Research Council (MRC) Epidemiology Unit, University of Cambridge 
School of Clinical Medicine, Institute of Metabolic Science, Cambridge 
Biomedical Campus, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, UK. Genetic Epidemiology Unit, Department 
of Epidemiology, Erasmus University Medical Center, 3000 CE Rotterdam, 
Netherlands.
(13)Department of Epidemiology, Fairbanks School of Public Health, Indianapolis, 
IN 46202, USA. Department of Medicine, Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.
(14)Division of General Internal Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. Welch Center for Prevention, Epidemiology, 
and Clinical Research, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. 
Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins University Bloomberg School of Public 
Health, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.
(15)Centre for Cancer Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Public Health and 
Primary Care, University of Cambridge, Strangeways Laboratory, Worts Causeway, 
Cambridge CB1 8RN, UK.
(16)Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus University Medical Center, 3000 CA 
Rotterdam, Netherlands.
(17)University of Lille, INSERM, Centre Hospitalier Régional Universitaire de 
Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, UMR 1167, RID-AGE, F-59000 Lille, France.
(18)Public Health Division of Gipuzkoa, San Sebastian 20013, Spain. Instituto 
BIO-Donostia, Basque Government, San Sebastian 20014, Spain. CIBER Epidemiología 
y Salud Pública (CIBERESP), Madrid 28029, Spain.
(19)Department of Epidemiology and Public Health (EA3430), University of 
Strasbourg, 67085 Strasbourg, France.
(20)Sobell Department of Motor Neuroscience, UCL Institute of Neurology, London 
WC1N 3BG, UK.
(21)INSERM, Centre de Recherche en Epidémiologie et Santé des Populations 
(CESP), 94807 Villejuif, France. Univeristy of Paris-Sud, F-94805 Villejuif, 
France.
(22)CIBER Epidemiología y Salud Pública (CIBERESP), Madrid 28029, Spain. Navarre 
Public Health Institute (ISPN), Pamplona 31003, Spain.
(23)The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge CB10 1SA, UK. University of 
Cambridge Metabolic Research Laboratories, Wellcome Trust-MRC Institute of 
Metabolic Science, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, UK.
(24)Cardiovascular Health Research Unit, Department of Medicine, University of 
Washington, Seattle, WA 98101, USA.
(25)Department of General and Interventional Cardiology, University Heart Center 
Hamburg, 20246 Hamburg, Germany.
(26)Department of Biostatistics and Center for Statistical Genetics, University 
of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2029, USA.
(27)German Institute of Human Nutrition, Potsdam-Rehbruecke, 14558 Nuthetal, 
Germany.
(28)Human Genetics Center, School of Public Health, University of Texas Health 
Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX 77025, USA. Human Genome Sequencing 
Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(29)Department of Genetics, Division of Statistical Genomics, Washington 
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63108, USA.
(30)Cancer Research UK Clinical Trials Unit, Institute for Cancer Studies, 
University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK.
(31)Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute and Department of Oncology, Li Ka 
Shing Centre, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK.
(32)University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8QQ, UK.
(33)Department of Biostatistics, Boston University School of Public Health, 
Boston, MA 02118, USA. Framingham Heart Study, National Heart, Lung, and Blood 
Institute (NHLBI), Framingham, MA 01702-5827, USA.
(34)Department of Psychiatry, Washington University School of Medicine, St. 
Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(35)Division of Statistical Genomics, Department of Genetics and Center for 
Genome Sciences and Systems Biology, Washington University School of Medicine, 
St. Louis, MO 63108, USA.
(36)Department of Medical Sciences, Molecular Epidemiology and Science for Life 
Laboratory, Uppsala University, SE-752 37 Uppsala, Sweden.
(37)Warwick Clinical Trials Unit, University of Warwick, Gibbet Hill Road, 
Coventry CV4 7AL, UK.
(38)University of Cambridge and National Institute of Health Research Cambridge 
Biomedical Research Centre, Cambridge University Hospitals National Health 
Service Foundation Trust, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, UK.
(39)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.
(40)Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche (CNR), Institute of Clinical Physiology, 
56124 Pisa, Italy.
(41)Department of Epidemiology, UMR 1027, INSERM, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire (CHU) de Toulouse, 31000 Toulouse, France.
(42)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Research Centre in 
Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, University of Insubria, 21100 Varese, 
Italy. Department of Epidemiology and Prevention, Istituti di Ricovero e Cura a 
Carattere Scientifico (IRCCS), Istituto Neurologico Mediterraneo Neuromed, 86077 
Pozzilli, Italy.
(43)Catalan Institute of Oncology (ICO), Barcelona 08908, Spain.
(44)Epidemiology and Prevention Unit, 20133 Milan, Italy.
(45)Research Unit, 931 41 Skellefteå, Sweden. Department of Public Health & 
Clinical Medicine, Umeå University, 901 85 Umeå, Sweden.
(46)Steno Diabetes Center, 2820 Gentofte, Denmark. National Institute of Public 
Health, Southern Denmark University, DK-1353 Odense, Denmark.
(47)Leiden University Medical Center, 2333 ZA Leiden, Netherlands.
(48)German Cancer Research Centre (DKFZ), 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
(49)UK Clinical Research Collaboration (UKCRC) Centre of Excellence for Public 
Health, Queen's University Belfast, Northern Ireland, Belfast BT12 6BJ, UK.
(50)University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 2JD, UK.
(51)National Institute for Health and Welfare, FI-00271 Helsinki, Finland.
(52)The Institute of Cancer Research, London SM2 5NG, UK.
(53)Institute of Clinical Medicine, Internal Medicine, University of Eastern 
Finland, FI-70211 Kuopio, Finland. Kuopio University Hospital, FL 70029 Kuopio, 
Finland.
(54)Research Centre for Prevention and Health, Capital Region, DK-2600 
Copenhagen, Denmark. Department of Clinical Experimental Research, 
Rigshospitalet, 2100 Glostrup, Denmark. Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty 
of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen, 
Denmark.
(55)Framingham Heart Study, Population Sciences Branch, NHLBI/National 
Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(56)The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge CB10 1SA, UK.
(57)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 
27599-7264, USA.
(58)Department of Biostatistics, University of Liverpool, Liverpool L69 3GL, UK. 
Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7BN, 
UK.
(59)Centre for Epidemiology, Institute of Population Health, University of 
Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PT, UK. University of Warwick, Coventry 
CV4 7AL, UK.
(60)Institute of Genetic Epidemiology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German 
Research Center for Environmental Health, D-85764 Neuherberg, Germany. 
Department of Medicine I, Ludwig Maximilians University Munich, 80336 Munich, 
Germany. DZHK (German Centre for Cardiovascular Research), partner site Munich 
Heart Alliance, 80802 Munich, Germany.
(61)Clinical Pharmacology, William Harvey Research Institute, Barts and The 
London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, London 
EC1M 6BQ, UK.
(62)CIBER Epidemiología y Salud Pública (CIBERESP), Madrid 28029, Spain. 
Department of Epidemiology, Murcia Regional Health Council, IMIB-Arrixaca, 
Murcia 30008, Spain.
(63)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Herlev Hospital, Copenhagen University 
Hospital, University of Copenhagen, 2730 Copenhagen, Denmark.
(64)Lund University, 20502 Malmö, Sweden.
(65)Cancer Research and Prevention Institute (ISPO), 50141 Florence, Italy.
(66)Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica e Chirurgia, Federico II University, 80131 
Naples, Italy.
(67)Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, 
MA 02114, USA. Cardiovascular Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Boston, MA 02114, USA. Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad 
Institute, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
(68)National Institute for Health and Welfare, FI-00271 Helsinki, Finland. 
Institute of Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM), University of Helsinki, FI-00014 
Helsinki, Finland.
(69)DZHK (German Centre for Cardiovascular Research), partner site Munich Heart 
Alliance, 80802 Munich, Germany. Institute of Epidemiology II, Helmholtz Zentrum 
München, German Research Center for Environmental Health, D-85764 Neuherberg, 
Germany.
(70)University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK. Department of Medical Oncology, 
Arden Cancer Centre, University Hospital Coventry and Warwickshire, West 
Midlands CV2 2DX, UK.
(71)Public Health Directorate, 33006 Oviedo, Asturias, Spain.
(72)Umeå University, 90187 Umeå, Sweden.
(73)Unit of Cancer Epidemiology, Citta' della Salute e della Scienza Hospital, 
University of Turin, 10126 Torino, Italy. Center for Cancer Prevention (CPO), 
10126 Torino, Italy. Human Genetics Foundation, 10126 Torino, Italy.
(74)CIBER Epidemiología y Salud Pública (CIBERESP), Madrid 28029, Spain. Escuela 
Andaluza de Salud Pública, Instituto de Investigación Biosanitaria ibs.GRANADA. 
Hospitales Universitarios de Granada/Universidad de Granada, Granada 18012, 
Spain.
(75)Institute of Psychological Medicine and Clinical Neuroscience, MRC Centre, 
Cardiff University, Cardiff CF24 4HQ, UK.
(76)International Agency for Research on Cancer, 69372 Lyon, France.
(77)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, University of Michigan, 
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2029, USA.
(78)Cancer Registry and Histopathology Unit, "Civic-M.P. Arezzo" Hospital, ASP 
Ragusa, 97100 Ragusa, Italy.
(79)National Institute for Public Health and the Environment (RIVM), 3720 BA 
Bilthoven, Netherlands.
(80)University Medical Center Utrecht, 3508 GA Utrecht, Netherlands.
(81)Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne 
NE2 4HH, UK.
(82)Centre for Cancer Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Oncology, University 
of Cambridge, Strangeways Laboratory, Worts Causeway, Cambridge CB1 8RN, UK.
(83)Laboratory of Translational Genomics, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and 
Genetics, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(84)Genetics, PCPS, GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.
(85)Centre for Cancer Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Public Health and 
Primary Care, University of Cambridge, Strangeways Laboratory, Worts Causeway, 
Cambridge CB1 8RN, UK. Centre for Cancer Genetic Epidemiology, Department of 
Oncology, University of Cambridge, Strangeways Laboratory, Worts Causeway, 
Cambridge CB1 8RN, UK.
(86)The Institute of Cancer Research, London SM2 5NG, UK. Royal Marsden NHS 
Foundation Trust, Fulham and Sutton, London and Surrey SW3 6JJ, UK.
(87)Institut für Integrative und Experimentelle Genomik, Universität zu Lübeck, 
23562 Lübeck, Germany.
(88)Department of Clinical Sciences, Genetic and Molecular Epidemiology Unit, 
Lund University, SE-205 Malmö, Sweden. Department of Public Health & Clinical 
Medicine, Umeå University, 901 85 Umeå, Sweden. Department of Nutrition, Harvard 
T. H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(89)Research Centre for Prevention and Health, DK-2600 Capital Region, Denmark. 
Department of Public Health, Institute of Health Science, University of 
Copenhagen, 1014 Copenhagen, Denmark. Faculty of Medicine, Aalborg University, 
9220 Aalborg, Denmark.
(90)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London SW3 6LY, 
UK. Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, London W2 1NY, UK. Ealing Hospital 
NHS Trust, Middlesex UB1 3HW, UK.
(91)Department of Medicine, University of Kuopio, FI-70211 Kuopio, Finland.
(92)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 
7BN, UK. Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism (OCDEM), 
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(93)Division of Epidemiology and Community Health, School of Public Health, 
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455-0381, USA.
(94)School of Public Health, Imperial College London, London W2 1PG, UK.
(95)Institute for Translational Genomics and Population Sciences, Los Angeles 
Biomedical Research Institute at Harbor-University of California, Los Angeles 
Medical Center, Torrance, CA 90502, USA.
(96)Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(97)Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, University of Leicester, Glenfield 
Hospital, Leicester LE3 9QP, UK. National Institute for Health Research, 
Leicester Cardiovascular Biomedical Research Unit, Glenfield Hospital, Leicester 
LE3 9QP, UK.
(98)DZHK (German Centre for Cardiovascular Research), partner site Munich Heart 
Alliance, 80802 Munich, Germany. Deutsches Herzzentrum München, Technische 
Universität München, 80636 Munich, Germany.
(99)Department of Internal Medicine, BH10-462, Internal Medicine, Lausanne 
University Hospital (CHUV), CH-1011 Lausanne, Switzerland.
(100)University of Cambridge Metabolic Research Laboratories, Wellcome Trust-MRC 
Institute of Metabolic Science, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, UK. MRC Metabolic Diseases 
Unit, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, UK. National Institute for Health Research Cambridge 
Biomedical Research Centre, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, UK.
(101)William Harvey Research Institute, Barts and The London School of Medicine 
and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, London EC1M 6BQ, UK.
(102)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Cedars-Sinai Medical 
Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA.
(103)Cardiovascular Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 
02114, USA. Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. 
Cardiology Division, Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General 
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA.
(104)Division of General Internal Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA. Department of Medicine, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(105)Genetics, PCPS, GlaxoSmithKline, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. 
dawn.m.waterworth@gsk.com robert.scott@mrc-epid.cam.ac.uk 
nick.wareham@mrc-epid.cam.ac.uk.

Regulatory authorities have indicated that new drugs to treat type 2 diabetes 
(T2D) should not be associated with an unacceptable increase in cardiovascular 
risk. Human genetics may be able to guide development of antidiabetic therapies 
by predicting cardiovascular and other health endpoints. We therefore 
investigated the association of variants in six genes that encode drug targets 
for obesity or T2D with a range of metabolic traits in up to 11,806 individuals 
by targeted exome sequencing and follow-up in 39,979 individuals by targeted 
genotyping, with additional in silico follow-up in consortia. We used these data 
to first compare associations of variants in genes encoding drug targets with 
the effects of pharmacological manipulation of those targets in clinical trials. 
We then tested the association of those variants with disease outcomes, 
including coronary heart disease, to predict cardiovascular safety of these 
agents. A low-frequency missense variant (Ala316Thr; rs10305492) in the gene 
encoding glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor (GLP1R), the target of GLP1R agonists, 
was associated with lower fasting glucose and T2D risk, consistent with GLP1R 
agonist therapies. The minor allele was also associated with protection against 
heart disease, thus providing evidence that GLP1R agonists are not likely to be 
associated with an unacceptable increase in cardiovascular risk. Our results 
provide an encouraging signal that these agents may be associated with benefit, 
a question currently being addressed in randomized controlled trials. Genetic 
variants associated with metabolic traits and multiple disease outcomes can be 
used to validate therapeutic targets at an early stage in the drug development 
process.

Copyright © 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aad3744
PMCID: PMC5219001
PMID: 27252175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Mini Rev Med Chem. 2017;17(1):51-61. doi: 10.2174/1389557516666160617100328.

Obesity: Current Treatment and Future Horizons.

Omran Z(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Pharmacy, Umm AlQura University, Al-Abidiyya, Makkah 21955, 
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

Obesity is growing at an alarming rate with huge consequences on health and 
economy. The worldwide prevalence of obesity has nearly doubled in less than 35 
years. Obesity causes many physiological dysfunctions that affect nearly every 
organ producing multiple morbidities. Despite these facts, there is still no 
clear, well-defined solution. Notwithstanding the devastating prevalence and 
consequences of obesity, today only five medicines, orlistat, lorcaserin, 
phentermine-topiramate, bupropion-naltrexone and liraglutide, are approved by 
the FDA for long-term treatment of obesity. In this review, the current 
approaches to treat obesity such as the development of diacylglycerol 
Oacyltransferase- 1 inhibitors, growth hormone secretagogue receptor-1a 
antagonists/inverse agonists, melanocortin-3 receptors agonists and melanin 
concentrating hormone receptor-1 antagonists, will be discussed. The main focus 
will be on the molecules that were able to reach clinical trials. The last 
section is dedicated to the "browning" phenomenon of white adipose tissues and 
the potential of Aldh1a1 inhibitors to treat obesity.

DOI: 10.2174/1389557516666160617100328
PMID: 27320641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Hepatology. 2016 Oct;64(4):1086-104. doi: 10.1002/hep.28716. Epub 2016 Aug
9.

Hypothalamic kappa opioid receptor mediates both diet-induced and melanin 
concentrating hormone-induced liver damage through inflammation and endoplasmic 
reticulum stress.

Imbernon M(1)(2), Sanchez-Rebordelo E(1)(2), Romero-Picó A(1)(2), Kalló I(3), 
Chee MJ(4), Porteiro B(1)(2), Al-Massadi O(1)(2), Contreras C(1)(2), Fernø J(5), 
Senra A(1)(2), Gallego R(6), Folgueira C(1)(2)(7), Seoane LM(2)(7), van Gestel 
M(8), Adan RA(8), Liposits Z(3), Dieguez C(1)(2), López M(1)(2), Nogueiras 
R(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, CIMUS, University of Santiago de 
Compostela-Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria.
(2)CIBER Fisiopatología de la Obesidad y Nutrición (CIBERobn), Santiago de 
Compostela, Spain.
(3)Laboratory of Endocrine Neurobiology, Institute of Experimental Medicine, 
Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Budapest, Hungary.
(4)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess 
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.
(5)Department of Clinical Science, KG Jebsen Center for Diabetes Research, 
University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(6)Department of Morphological Sciences, School of Medicine, University of 
Santiago de Compostela-Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria.
(7)Grupo Fisiopatología Endocrina, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria de 
Santiago de Compostela, Complexo, Hospitalario Universitario de Santiago 
(CHUS/SERGAS), Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
(8)Department of Neuroscience and Pharmacology, Rudolf Magnus Institute of 
Neuroscience, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(9)Department of Physiology, CIMUS, University of Santiago de 
Compostela-Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria. ruben.nogueiras@usc.es.
(10)CIBER Fisiopatología de la Obesidad y Nutrición (CIBERobn), Santiago de 
Compostela, Spain. ruben.nogueiras@usc.es.

The opioid system is widely known to modulate the brain reward system and thus 
affect the behavior of humans and other animals, including feeding. We 
hypothesized that the hypothalamic opioid system might also control energy 
metabolism in peripheral tissues. Mice lacking the kappa opioid receptor (κOR) 
and adenoviral vectors overexpressing or silencing κOR were stereotaxically 
delivered in the lateral hypothalamic area (LHA) of rats. Vagal denervation was 
performed to assess its effect on liver metabolism. Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) 
stress was inhibited by pharmacological (tauroursodeoxycholic acid) and genetic 
(overexpression of the chaperone glucose-regulated protein 78 kDa) approaches. 
The peripheral effects on lipid metabolism were assessed by histological 
techniques and western blot. We show that in the LHA κOR directly controls 
hepatic lipid metabolism through the parasympathetic nervous system, independent 
of changes in food intake and body weight. κOR colocalizes with melanin 
concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCH-R1) in the LHA, and genetic disruption of 
κOR reduced melanin concentrating hormone-induced liver steatosis. The 
functional relevance of these findings was given by the fact that silencing of 
κOR in the LHA attenuated both methionine choline-deficient, diet-induced and 
choline-deficient, high-fat diet-induced ER stress, inflammation, 
steatohepatitis, and fibrosis, whereas overexpression of κOR in this area 
promoted liver steatosis. Overexpression of glucose-regulated protein 78 kDa in 
the liver abolished hypothalamic κOR-induced steatosis by reducing hepatic ER 
stress.
CONCLUSIONS: This study reveals a novel hypothalamic-parasympathetic circuit 
modulating hepatic function through inflammation and ER stress independent of 
changes in food intake or body weight; these findings might have implications 
for the clinical use of opioid receptor antagonists. (Hepatology 
2016;64:1086-1104).

© 2016 The Authors. (Hepatology published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc., on behalf 
of the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.28716
PMCID: PMC5129461
PMID: 27387967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Br J Pharmacol. 2016 Sep;173(18):2739-51. doi: 10.1111/bph.13548. Epub 2016
Aug  3.

Effects of a novel potent melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 antagonist, 
AZD1979, on body weight homeostasis in mice and dogs.

Ploj K(1)(2), Benthem L(1), Kakol-Palm D(1), Gennemark P(1), Andersson L(1)(2), 
Bjursell M(3), Börjesson J(3), Kärrberg L(1)(2), Månsson M(4), Antonsson M(1), 
Johansson A(1), Iverson S(2), Carlsson B(5), Turnbull A(1), Lindén D(1).

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular & Metabolic Diseases innovative Medicines (CVMD iMed), 
AstraZeneca Mölndal, Sweden.
(2)Drug Safety & Metabolism, AstraZeneca Mölndal, Sweden.
(3)Discovery Sciences Transgenics, AstraZeneca, Mölndal, Sweden.
(4)Discovery Sciences Statistics, AstraZeneca Mölndal, Sweden.
(5)Early Clinical Development, AstraZeneca, Mölndal, Sweden.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is an orexigen, and 
while rodents express one MCH receptor (MCH1 receptor), humans, non-human 
primates and dogs express two MCH receptors (MCH1 and MCH2 ). MCH1 receptor 
antagonists have been developed for the treatment of obesity and lower body 
weight in rodents. However, the mechanisms for the body weight loss and whether 
MCH1 receptor antagonism can lower body weight in species expressing both MCH 
receptors are not fully understood.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: A novel recently identified potent MCH1 receptor 
antagonist, AZD1979, was studied in wild type and Mchr1 knockout (KO) mice and 
by using pair-feeding and indirect calorimetry in diet-induced obese (DIO) mice. 
The effect of AZD1979 on body weight was also studied in beagle dogs.
KEY RESULTS: AZD1979 bound to MCH1 receptors in the CNS and dose-dependently 
reduced body weight in DIO mice leading to improved homeostasis model 
assessment-index of insulin sensitivity. AZD1979 did not affect food intake or 
body weight in Mchr1 KO mice demonstrating specificity for the MCH1 receptor 
mechanism. In DIO mice, initial AZD1979-mediated body weight loss was driven by 
decreased food intake, but an additional component of preserved energy 
expenditure was apparent in pair-feeding and indirect calorimetry studies. 
AZD1979 also dose-dependently reduced body weight in dogs.
CONCLUSION AND IMPLICATIONS: AZD1979 is a novel potent MCH1 receptor antagonist 
that affects both food intake and energy expenditure. That AZD1979 also lowers 
body weight in a species expressing both MCH receptors holds promise for the use 
of MCH1 receptor antagonists for the treatment of human obesity.

© 2016 The British Pharmacological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/bph.13548
PMCID: PMC4995290
PMID: 27400775 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2016;922:161-181. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-35072-1_12.

Beyond Membrane Protein Structure: Drug Discovery, Dynamics and Difficulties.

Biggin PC(1), Aldeghi M(2), Bodkin MJ(3), Heifetz A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford, 
OX1 3QU, UK. philip.biggin@bioch.ox.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford, 
OX1 3QU, UK.
(3)Evotec Ltd, 114 Innovation Drive, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxfordshire, OX14 
4RZ, UK.

Most of the previous content of this book has focused on obtaining the 
structures of membrane proteins. In this chapter we explore how those structures 
can be further used in two key ways. The first is their use in structure based 
drug design (SBDD) and the second is how they can be used to extend our 
understanding of their functional activity via the use of molecular dynamics. 
Both aspects now heavily rely on computations. This area is vast, and alas, too 
large to consider in depth in a single book chapter. Thus where appropriate we 
have referred the reader to recent reviews for deeper assessment of the field. 
We discuss progress via the use of examples from two main drug target areas; 
G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) and ion channels. We end with a discussion 
of some of the main challenges in the area.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-35072-1_12
PMID: 27553242 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


349. J Med Chem. 2016 Oct 13;59(19):8848-8858. doi: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.6b00676.
 Epub 2016 Sep 15.

Synthesis and Antiobesity Properties of 
6-(4-Chlorophenyl)-3-(4-((3,3-difluoro-1-hydroxycyclobutyl)methoxy)-3-methoxyphenyl)thieno[3,2-d]pyrimidin-4(3H)-one 
(BMS-814580): A Highly Efficacious Melanin Concentrating Hormone Receptor 1 
(MCHR1) Inhibitor.

Ahmad S(1), Washburn WN(1), Hernandez AS(1), Bisaha S(1), Ngu K(1), Wang W(1), 
Pelleymounter MA(1), Longhi D(1), Flynn N(1), Azzara AV(1), Rohrbach K(1), 
Devenny J(1), Rooney S(1), Thomas M(1), Glick S(1), Godonis H(1), Harvey S(1), 
Zhang H(1), Gemzik B(1), Janovitz EB(1), Huang C(1), Zhang L(1), Robl JA(1), 
Murphy BJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Diseases Chemistry, ‡Metabolic Diseases Biology, §PCO MAP, ∥PCO 
Discovery Toxicology, and ⊥PCO Bioanalytical Research, Bristol-Myers Squibb 
Research & Development , P.O. Box 4000, Princeton, New Jersey 08543, United 
States.

The potent MCHR1 in vitro and in vivo antagonist activity of a series of cyclic 
tertiary alcohols derived from compound 2b is described. Subsequent 
pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic studies identified BMS-814580 (compound 10) 
as a highly efficacious antiobesity agent with a relatively clean in vitro and 
in vivo safety profile.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.6b00676
PMID: 27564419 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2016 Oct;40(10):2199-2207. doi: 10.1111/acer.13181.
Epub  2016 Aug 31.

Melanin-Concentrating Hormone and Its MCH-1 Receptor: Relationship Between 
Effects on Alcohol and Caloric Intake.

Karlsson C(1), Aziz AM(2), Rehman F(3), Pitcairn C(3), Barchiesi R(2), Barbier 
E(2), Wendel Hansen M(2), Gehlert D(4), Steensland P(5), Heilig M(2), Thorsell 
A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Linkoping University, 
Linkoping, Sweden. camilla.s.karlsson@liu.se.
(2)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Linkoping University, 
Linkoping, Sweden.
(3)Laboratory of Clinical and Translational Studies, NIAAA, NIH, Bethesda, 
Maryland.
(4)CNS Research, Lilly Research Laboratories, Eli Lilly and Company, 
Indianapolis, Indiana.
(5)Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Reward and energy homeostasis are both regulated by a network of 
hypothalamic neuropeptide systems. The melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) and 
its MCH-1 receptor (MCH1-R) modulate alcohol intake, but it remains unknown to 
what extent this reflects actions on energy balance or reward. Here, we 
evaluated the MCH1-R in regulation of caloric intake and motivation to consume 
alcohol in states of escalated consumption.
METHODS: Rats had intermittent access (IA) to alcohol and were divided into 
high- and low-drinking groups. Food and alcohol consumption was assessed after 
administration of an MCH1-R antagonist, GW803430. Next, GW803430 was evaluated 
on alcohol self-administration in protracted abstinence induced by IA in 
high-drinking rats. Finally, the effect of GW803430 was assessed on alcohol 
self-administration in acute withdrawal in rats exposed to alcohol vapor. Gene 
expression of MCH and MCH1-R was measured in the hypothalamus and nucleus 
accumbens (NAc) in both acute and protracted abstinence.
RESULTS: High-drinking IA rats consumed more calories from alcohol than chow and 
GW803430 decreased both chow and alcohol intake. In low-drinking rats, only food 
intake was affected. In protracted abstinence from IA, alcohol 
self-administration was significantly reduced by pretreatment with GW803430 and 
gene expression of both MCH and the MCH1-R were dysregulated in hypothalamus and 
NAc. In contrast, during acute withdrawal from vapor exposure, treatment with 
GW803430 did not affect alcohol self-administration, and no changes in MCH or 
MCH1-R gene expression were observed.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest a dual role of MCH and the MCH1-R in regulation of 
alcohol intake, possibly through mechanisms involving caloric intake and reward 
motivation. A selective suppression of alcohol self-administration during 
protracted abstinence by GW803430 was observed and accompanied by adaptations in 
gene expression of MCH and MCH1-R. Selective suppression of escalated 
consumption renders the MCH1-R an attractive target for treatment of alcohol use 
disorders.

Copyright © 2016 by the Research Society on Alcoholism.

DOI: 10.1111/acer.13181
PMID: 27579857 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2016 Oct 1;26(19):4559-4564. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2016.08.072. Epub 2016 Aug 22.

Evolution of physicochemical properties of melanin concentrating hormone 
receptor 1 (MCHr1) antagonists.

Johansson A(1).

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular and Metabolic Diseases, Innovative Medicines and Early 
Development Biotech Unit, AstraZeneca, Pepparedsleden 1, Mölndal 431 83, Sweden. 
Electronic address: anders.m.johansson@astrazeneca.com.

One pharmacological principle for the treatment of obesity is blockade of the 
melanin concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHr1), which in rodents has been 
shown to be strongly associated with food intake and energy expenditure. 
However, discovery of safe and efficacious MCHr1 antagonists has proved to be 
complex. So far, six compounds have been progressed into clinical trials, but 
clinical validation of the concept is still lacking. An account of discovery of 
the three most recent clinical candidates targeting the MCHr1 receptor is given, 
with an emphasis on their physicochemical properties.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2016.08.072
PMID: 27595423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2016 Nov;26(11):1826-1835. doi: 
10.1016/j.euroneuro.2016.08.014. Epub 2016 Sep 9.

Inactivation of the melanin concentrating hormone system impairs maternal 
behavior.

Alachkar A(1), Alhassen L(2), Wang Z(2), Wang L(2), Onouye K(2), Sanathara N(2), 
Civelli O(3).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of California, 
369 Med Surge II, Irvine, CA 92697-4625, United States. Electronic address: 
aalachka@uci.edu.
(2)Departments of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of California, 
369 Med Surge II, Irvine, CA 92697-4625, United States.
(3)Departments of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of California, 
369 Med Surge II, Irvine, CA 92697-4625, United States; Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
School of Medicine, University of California, 369 Med Surge II, Irvine, CA 
92697-4625, United States; Developmental and Cell Biology, School of Medicine, 
University of California, 369 Med Surge II, Irvine, CA 92697-4625, United 
States.

In order to prepare the mother for the demands of pregnancy and lactation, the 
maternal brain is subjected to a number of adaptations. Maternal behaviors are 
regulated by complex neuronal interactions. Here, we show that the melanin 
concentrating hormone (MCH) system is an important regulator of maternal 
behaviors. First, we report that melanin concentrating hormone receptor 1 
knockout (MCHR1 KO) mice display a disruption of maternal behavior. Early 
postpartum MCHR1 KO females exhibit poor nesting, deficits in pup retrieval and 
maternal aggression. In addition, ablation of MCH receptors results in decreased 
milk production and prolactin mRNA levels. Then we show that these results are 
in line with those obtained in wild type mice (WT) treated with the specific 
MCHR1 antagonist GW803430. Furthermore, following pups retrieval, MCHR1 KO mice 
display a lower level of Fos expression than WT mice in the ventral tegmental 
area, and nucleus accumbens. With the progression of the lactation period, 
however, the MCHR1 KO mice improve maternal care towards their pups. This is 
manifested by an increase in the pups׳ survival rate and the decrease in pups׳ 
retrieval time beyond the second day after parturition. In conclusion, we show 
that the MCH system plays a significant role in the initiation of maternal 
behavior. In this context, MCH may play a role in integrating information from 
multiple sources, and connecting brain reward, homeostatic and regulatory 
systems.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. and ECNP. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.euroneuro.2016.08.014
PMCID: PMC5929110
PMID: 27617778 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest None.


353. Behav Brain Res. 2017 Jan 1;316:271-278. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2016.09.028.
Epub  2016 Sep 12.

Consequences of constitutive deletion of melanin-concentrating hormone-1 
receptors for feeding and foraging behaviors of mice.

Eiler WJ 2nd(1), Chen Y(2), Slieker LJ(2), Ardayfio PA(1), Statnick MA(2), 
Witkin JM(3).

Author information:
(1)Divisions of Neuroscience, Lilly Research Laboratories, Eli Lilly and 
Company, Indianapolis, IN, 46285, United States.
(2)Endocrinology, Lilly Research Laboratories, Eli Lilly and Company, 
Indianapolis, IN, 46285, United States.
(3)Divisions of Neuroscience, Lilly Research Laboratories, Eli Lilly and 
Company, Indianapolis, IN, 46285, United States. Electronic address: 
jwitkin@lilly.com.

In order to decipher the functional involvement of melanin-concentrating hormone 
1 (MCH1) receptors in the control of feeding and foraging behaviors, mice with 
constitutive deletion of MCH1 receptors MCH1R -/- or knockout (KO) were studied 
and compared to age-matched littermate control mice (MCH1R +/+ or wildtype 
(WT)). Several challenges to food-motivated behaviors of food-restricted WT and 
KO mice were implemented. There were no differences between genotypes in the 
acquisition of a nose-poke response that produced food or in a discrimination 
between a response that produced food and one that did not. There were also no 
genotype differences in the rate of extinction of a food-motivated response. 
However, during the first day of extinction, foraging behaviors were increased 
significantly more in KO than in WT mice. Likewise, when the response 
requirement to obtain food was progressively increased, KO mice made 
significantly more food-directed responses than WT mice. Although adulteration 
of food with quinine did not suppress food-directed behavior in either genotype 
when the mice were food-restricted, manipulation of the degree of 
food-deprivation resulted in suppression of behavior of WT mice without 
suppressing the behavior of KO mice. Although response-produced foot shock 
suppressed food-maintained responding of both WT and KO mice, equipotent levels 
of shock (based upon psychophysical thresholds) suppressed behavior of WT mice 
without suppressing behavior of the KO mice. Finally, under a Vogel conflict 
procedure, KO mice had significantly higher levels of both punished and 
non-punished food maintained responding. Thus, the data from challenges with 
both appetitive and noxious stimulus challenges support the conclusion that mice 
with constitutive deletion of MCH1Rs have increased food seeking motivation that 
is coincident with their higher metabolism. The data also highlight important 
differences in the biological impact of MCH1 receptor KO and MCH1 receptor 
antagonism.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2016.09.028
PMID: 27633558 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Sleep Sci. 2016 Apr-Jun;9(2):89-93. doi: 10.1016/j.slsci.2016.05.010. Epub
2016  Jun 7.

Subchronical treatment with Fluoxetine modifies the activity of the MCHergic and 
hypocretinergic systems. Evidences from peptide CSF concentration and gene 
expression.

Calegare BF(1), Costa A(2), Fernandes L(1), Dias AL(1), Torterolo P(2), Almeida 
VD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychobiology, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, 
Brazil.
(2)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, Universidad de la República, 
Montevideo, Uruguay.

In the postero-lateral hypothalamus are located two neuronal systems that 
utilize the neuropeptides melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) and hypocretins 
(also called orexins) as neuromodulators. These systems have reciprocal 
connections between them, and project throughout the central nervous system. MCH 
has been involved in the generation of sleep, mainly REM sleep, while 
hypocretins have a critical role in the generation of wakefulness. MCHergic 
activity is also involved in the pathophysiology of major depressive disorder 
(MD). In this regards, intracerebral administration of MCH promotes 
pro-depressive behaviors (i.e., immobility in the forced swimming test) and REM 
sleep hypersomnia, which is an important trait of depression. Furthermore, the 
antagonism of the MCHR-1 receptor has a reliable antidepressant effect, 
suggesting that MCH is a pro-depressive factor. Hypocretins have been also 
involved in mood regulation; however, their role in depression is still on 
debate. Taking these data into account, we explored whether systemic 
subchronical treatment with Fluoxetine (FLX), a serotonergic antidepressant, 
modifies the concentration of MCH in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), as well as 
the preproMCH mRNA expression. We also evaluated the hypocretinergic system by 
quantifying the hypocretin-levels in the CSF and the preprohypocretin mRNA 
expression. Compared to control, FLX increased the levels of preprohypocretin 
mRNA without affecting the hypocretin-1 CSF levels. On the contrary, FLX 
significantly decreased the MCH CSF concentration without affecting the 
preproMCH gene expression. This result is in agreement with the fact that MCH 
serum level diminishes during the antidepressant treatment in MD, and supports 
the hypothesis that an increase in the MCHergic activity could have 
pro-depressive consequences.

DOI: 10.1016/j.slsci.2016.05.010
PMCID: PMC5022008
PMID: 27656272


355. Mol Neurobiol. 2017 Dec;54(10):7706-7721. doi: 10.1007/s12035-016-0258-8.
Epub  2016 Nov 14.

Novel Neuroprotective Effects of Melanin-Concentrating Hormone in Parkinson's 
Disease.

Park JY(1)(2), Kim SN(1)(3), Yoo J(4), Jang J(1), Lee A(1)(5), Oh JY(1)(5), Kim 
H(4), Oh ST(4), Park SU(1)(6), Kim J(7), Park HJ(8)(9), Jeon S(10).

Author information:
(1)Integrative Parkinson's Disease Research Group, Acupuncture & Meridian 
Science Research Center, Kyung Hee University, 26 Kyungheedae-ro, 
Dongdaemoon-gu, Seoul, 02447, Republic of Korea.
(2)College of Korean Medicine, Daejeon University, 62 Daehak-ro, Dong-gu, 
Daejeon, 34520, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Meridian and Acupoint, Dongguk University, Dongguk-ro 32, 
Ilsandong-gu, Goyang-si, Gyeonggi-do, 10326, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Dongguk University, 3-ga, Pil-dong, 
Chung-gu, Seoul, 04620, Republic of Korea.
(5)Department of Korean Medical Science, Graduate School of Korean Medicine, 
Kyung Hee University, 26 Kyungheedae-ro, Dongdaemoon-gu, Seoul, 02447, Republic 
of Korea.
(6)Stroke and Neurological Disorders Center, Kyung Hee University Hospital at 
Gangdong, Seoul, 05278, Republic of Korea.
(7)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Dongguk University, 3-ga, Pil-dong, 
Chung-gu, Seoul, 04620, Republic of Korea. jk2316@gmail.com.
(8)Integrative Parkinson's Disease Research Group, Acupuncture & Meridian 
Science Research Center, Kyung Hee University, 26 Kyungheedae-ro, 
Dongdaemoon-gu, Seoul, 02447, Republic of Korea. acufind@khu.ac.kr.
(9)Department of Korean Medical Science, Graduate School of Korean Medicine, 
Kyung Hee University, 26 Kyungheedae-ro, Dongdaemoon-gu, Seoul, 02447, Republic 
of Korea. acufind@khu.ac.kr.
(10)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Center for Creative Biomedical 
Scientists, Chonnam National University, Gwangju, 61469, Republic of Korea. 
jsong0304@hanmail.net.

Acupuncture has shown the therapeutic effect on various neurodegenerative 
disorders including Parkinson's disease (PD). While investigating the 
neuroprotective mechanism of acupuncture, we firstly found the novel function of 
melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) as a potent neuroprotective candidate. Here, 
we explored whether hypothalamic MCH mediates the neuroprotective action of 
acupuncture. In addition, we aimed at evaluating the neuroprotective effects of 
MCH and elucidating underlying mechanism in vitro and in vivo PD models. First, 
we tested whether hypothalamic MCH mediates the neuroprotective effects of 
acupuncture by challenging MCH-R1 antagonist (i.p.) in mice PD model. We also 
investigated whether MCH has a beneficial role in dopaminergic neuronal 
protection in vitro primary midbrain and human neuronal cultures and in vivo 
MPTP-induced, Pitx3-/-, and A53T mutant mice PD models. Transcriptomics followed 
by quantitative PCR and western blot analyses were performed to reveal the 
neuroprotective mechanism of MCH. We first found that hypothalamic MCH 
biosynthesis was directly activated by acupuncture treatment and that 
administration of an MCH-R1 antagonist reverses the neuroprotective effects of 
acupuncture. A novel finding is that MCH showed a beneficial role in 
dopaminergic neuron protection via downstream pathways related to neuronal 
survival. This is the first study to suggest the novel neuroprotective action of 
MCH as well as the involvement of hypothalamic MCH in the acupuncture effects in 
PD, which holds great promise for the application of MCH in the therapy of 
neurodegenerative diseases.

DOI: 10.1007/s12035-016-0258-8
PMID: 27844281 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Toxicol Sci. 2017 Feb;155(2):379-388. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfw216. Epub 2016
Oct  20.

Mechanisms for Hepatobiliary Toxicity in Rats Treated with an Antagonist of 
Melanin Concentrating Hormone Receptor 1 (MCHR1).

Otieno MA, Bhaskaran V(1), Janovitz E, Callejas Y, Foster WB, Washburn W, Megill 
JR, Lehman-McKeeman L, Gemzik B.

Author information:
(1)Discovery Toxicology, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Princeton, New Jersey 08543 
vasanthi.bhaskaran@bms.com.

The objective of this work was to investigate the mechanisms of hepatobiliary 
toxicity caused by thienopyrimidone MCHR1 antagonists using BMS-773174 as a tool 
molecule. Co-administration of the pan CYP inhibitor 1-aminobenzotriazole with 
BMS-773174 prevented hepatobiliary damage, and direct delivery of the diol 
metabolite BMS-769750 caused hepatobiliary toxicity, identifying the diol and 
possibly its downstream hydroxyacid (BMS-800754) metabolite as the toxic 
species. Rat liver gene expression revealed treatment-related changes in hepatic 
transporters and induction of oval cell-specific genes including deleted 
malignant tumor 1 (Dmbt1). The metabolites did not alter hepatic transporter 
activities, suggesting that transporter-mediated cholestasis was not involved. 
Because injury to biliary epithelium can result in adaptive hyperplasia, rat 
biliary epithelial cells (BECs) were isolated and exposed to the oxidative 
metabolites. BMS-769750 was cytotoxic to BECs, but not rat hepatocytes, 
suggesting a role of the diol in biliary epithelial injury. BMS-800754 was 
cytotoxic to rat hepatocytes therefore its contribution to hepatocyte injury in 
rats is a possibility. Induction of Dmbt1 in rat BECs was investigated because 
of its role in hepatic progenitor cell differentiation/proliferation during 
injury. Dmbt1 mRNA was induced by BMS-769750, but not BMS-800754 in BECs; this 
induction and cellular injury was confirmed with diol metabolites formed by 
other compounds with the same hepatobiliary liability. In conclusion, 
hepatobiliary injury by thienopyrimidinone MCHR1 antagonists was driven through 
a CYP-mediated bioactivation pathway. Induction of Dmbt1 mRNA coupled with 
cellular injury suggests that injury of biliary epithelium may be the first step 
toward an adaptive proliferative response causing BDH by these compounds.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
of Toxicology. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/toxsci/kfw216
PMID: 28025230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Curr Radiopharm. 2017;10(1):35-40. doi: 10.2174/1874471009666161230113630.

Development of a Novel Carbon-11 Labeled PET Radioligand for Melanin- 
Concentrating Hormone Receptor 1.

Igawa H(1), Stepanov V(2), Tari L(2), Okuda S(3), Yamamoto S(3), Kasai S(3), 
Nagisa Y(4), Haggkvist J(2), Svedberg M(2), Toth M(2), Takano A(2), Halldin 
C(2).

Author information:
(1)Pharmaceutical Research Division, Takeda Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., 26-1, 
Muraoka-Higashi 2- Chome, Fujisawa, Kanagawa 251-8555. Japan.
(2)Center for Psychiatric Research, Department of Clinical Neuroscience, 
Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 76, Stockholm. Sweden.
(3)Pharmaceutical Research Division, Takeda Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., 26-1, 
Muraoka-Higashi 2-Chome, Fujisawa, Kanagawa 251-8555. Japan.
(4)CVM Marketing Japan Pharma Business Unit, Takeda Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. 
12-10, Nihonbashi 2-Chome, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 103-8686. Japan.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is an attractive 
target for antiobesity agents and many drug discovery programs have been 
dedicated to identify smallmolecule antagonists of melanin-concentrating hormone 
receptor 1 (MCHR1). The aim of this study was to develop a positron emission 
tomography (PET) tracer for MCHR1 for translation of preclinical pharmacology to 
clinic to enhance success rate of drug discovery programs.
METHODS: We identified 
4-(cyclopropylmethoxy)-N-[8-methyl-3-({[(1-methyl-1H-pyrrol-2-yl)methyl] 
amino}ethyl)quinolin-7-yl]benzamide (Compound II) from Takeda MCHR1 antagonist 
library by utilizing binding affinity, log D value, physicochemical parameters 
ideal for a central nerve system agent, and synthetic feasibility of 
corresponding carbon-11 labeled radioligands as selection parameters for tracer 
candidates.
RESULTS: In the rat PET study, [11C] Compound II showed clear uptake in the 
caudate/putamen with the pretreatment of cyclosporine A and its uptake was 
higher than that in the cerebellum where expression of MCHR1 was reported to be 
low.
CONCLUSION: In summary, [11C]Compound II is a promising lead compound for 
developing a suitable MCHR1 PET radioligand. [11C]Compound II, in combination 
with cyclosporine A, could be used as a research tool to visualize and quantify 
MCHR1 in rodents.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.org.

DOI: 10.2174/1874471009666161230113630
PMID: 28034352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Hepatology. 2017 Aug;66(2):449-465. doi: 10.1002/hep.29117. Epub 2017 May
16.

Characterization of ferroptosis in murine models of hemochromatosis.

Wang H(1), An P(1), Xie E(1), Wu Q(1), Fang X(1), Gao H(1), Zhang Z(1), Li Y(1), 
Wang X(1), Zhang J(1), Li G(1), Yang L(1), Liu W(2), Min J(1), Wang F(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Public Health, Zhengzhou University; School of Public Health, The 
First Affiliated Hospital, Institute of Translational Medicine, Collaborative 
Innovation Center for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, School of 
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Program in Molecular and 
Cell Biology, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.

Ferroptosis is a recently identified iron-dependent form of nonapoptotic cell 
death implicated in brain, kidney, and heart pathology. However, the biological 
roles of iron and iron metabolism in ferroptosis remain poorly understood. Here, 
we studied the functional role of iron and iron metabolism in the pathogenesis 
of ferroptosis. We found that ferric citrate potently induces ferroptosis in 
murine primary hepatocytes and bone marrow-derived macrophages. Next, we 
screened for ferroptosis in mice fed a high-iron diet and in mouse models of 
hereditary hemochromatosis with iron overload. We found that ferroptosis 
occurred in mice fed a high-iron diet and in two knockout mouse lines that 
develop severe iron overload (Hjv-/- and Smad4Alb/Alb mice) but not in a third 
line that develops only mild iron overload (Hfe-/- mice). Moreover, we found 
that iron overload-induced liver damage was rescued by the ferroptosis inhibitor 
ferrostatin-1. To identify the genes involved in iron-induced ferroptosis, we 
performed microarray analyses of iron-treated bone marrow-derived macrophages. 
Interestingly, solute carrier family 7, member 11 (Slc7a11), a known 
ferroptosis-related gene, was significantly up-regulated in iron-treated cells 
compared with untreated cells. However, genetically deleting Slc7a11 expression 
was not sufficient to induce ferroptosis in mice. Next, we studied iron-treated 
hepatocytes and bone marrow-derived macrophages isolated from Slc7a11-/- mice 
fed a high-iron diet.
CONCLUSION: We found that iron treatment induced ferroptosis in Slc7a11-/- 
cells, indicating that deleting Slc7a11 facilitates the onset of ferroptosis 
specifically under high-iron conditions; these results provide compelling 
evidence that iron plays a key role in triggering Slc7a11-mediated ferroptosis 
and suggest that ferroptosis may be a promising target for treating 
hemochromatosis-related tissue damage. (Hepatology 2017;66:449-465).

© 2017 The Authors. Hepatology published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc., on behalf 
of the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.29117
PMCID: PMC5573904
PMID: 28195347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Am J Clin Nutr. 2017 Apr;105(4):991-1000. doi: 10.3945/ajcn.116.143164. Epub
 2017 Mar 8.

Impact of polyunsaturated and saturated fat overfeeding on the DNA-methylation 
pattern in human adipose tissue: a randomized controlled trial.

Perfilyev A(1), Dahlman I(2), Gillberg L(3), Rosqvist F(4), Iggman D(4), Volkov 
P(1), Nilsson E(1), Risérus U(4), Ling C(5).

Author information:
(1)Epigenetics and Diabetes Unit, Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund 
University Diabetes Center, Lund University, Clinical Research Center, Malmö, 
Sweden.
(2)Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University 
Hospital, Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Diabetes and Metabolism, Department of Endocrinology, Rigshospitalet, 
Copenhagen, Denmark; and.
(4)Clinical Nutrition and Metabolism, Department of Public Health and Caring 
Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(5)Epigenetics and Diabetes Unit, Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund 
University Diabetes Center, Lund University, Clinical Research Center, Malmö, 
Sweden; charlotte.ling@med.lu.se.

Erratum in
    Am J Clin Nutr. 2017 Jul;106(1):325.

Background: Dietary fat composition can affect ectopic lipid accumulation and, 
thereby, insulin resistance. Diets that are high in saturated fatty acids (SFAs) 
or polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) have different metabolic 
responses.Objective: We investigated whether the epigenome of human adipose 
tissue is affected differently by dietary fat composition and general 
overfeeding in a randomized trial.Design: We studied the effects of 7 wk of 
excessive SFA (n = 17) or PUFA (n = 14) intake (+750 kcal/d) on the DNA 
methylation of ∼450,000 sites in human subcutaneous adipose tissue. Both diets 
resulted in similar body weight increases. We also combined the data from the 2 
groups to examine the overall effect of overfeeding on the DNA methylation in 
adipose tissue.Results: The DNA methylation of 4875 Cytosine-phosphate-guanine 
(CpG) sites was affected differently between the 2 diets. Furthermore, both the 
SFA and PUFA diets increased the mean degree of DNA methylation in adipose 
tissue, particularly in promoter regions. However, although the mean methylation 
was changed in 1797 genes [e.g., alpha-ketoglutarate dependent dioxygenase 
(FTO), interleukin 6 (IL6), insulin receptor (INSR), neuronal growth regulator 1 
(NEGR1), and proopiomelanocortin (POMC)] by PUFAs, only 125 genes [e.g., 
adiponectin, C1Q and collagen domain containing (ADIPOQ)] were changed by SFA 
overfeeding. In addition, the SFA diet significantly altered the expression of 
28 transcripts [e.g., acyl-CoA oxidase 1 (ACOX1) and FAT atypical cadherin 1 
(FAT1)], whereas the PUFA diet did not significantly affect gene expression. 
When the data from the 2 diet groups were combined, the mean methylation of 1444 
genes, including fatty acid binding protein 1 (FABP1), fatty acid binding 
protein 2 (FABP2), melanocortin 2 receptor (MC2R), MC3R, PPARG coactivator 1 α 
(PPARGC1A), and tumor necrosis factor (TNF), was changed in adipose tissue by 
overfeeding. Moreover, the baseline DNA methylation of 12 CpG sites that was 
annotated to 9 genes [e.g., mitogen-activated protein kinase 7 (MAPK7), melanin 
concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1), and splicing factor SWAP homolog 
(SFRS8)] was associated with the degree of weight increase in response to extra 
energy intake.Conclusions: SFA overfeeding and PUFA overfeeding induce distinct 
epigenetic changes in human adipose tissue. In addition, we present data that 
suggest that baseline DNA methylation can predict weight increase in response to 
overfeeding in humans. This trial was registered at clinicaltrials.gov as 
NCT01427140.

© 2017 American Society for Nutrition.

DOI: 10.3945/ajcn.116.143164
PMID: 28275132 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Gene. 2017 Jun 5;615:57-67. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2017.03.009. Epub 2017 Mar
11.

Characterization of melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) and its receptor in 
chickens: Tissue expression, functional analysis, and fasting-induced 
up-regulation of hypothalamic MCH expression.

Cui L(1), Lv C(1), Zhang J(1), Mo C(1), Lin D(1), Li J(1), Wang Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Key laboratory of Bio-resources and Eco-environment of Ministry of Education, 
College of Life Sciences, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610064, PR China.
(2)Key laboratory of Bio-resources and Eco-environment of Ministry of Education, 
College of Life Sciences, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610064, PR China. 
Electronic address: cdwyjhk@gmail.com.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a neuropeptide expressed in the brain and 
exerts its actions through interaction with the two known G protein-coupled 
receptors, namely melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 and 2 (MCHR1 and 
MCHR2) in mammals. However, the information regarding the expression and 
functionality of MCH and MCHR(s) remains largely unknown in birds. In this 
study, using RT-PCR and RACE PCR, we amplified and cloned a MCHR1-like receptor, 
which is named cMCHR4 according to its evolutionary origin, and a MCHR2 from 
chicken brain. The cloned cMCHR4 was predicted to encode a receptor of 367 amino 
acids, which shares high amino acid identities with MCHR4 of ducks (90%), 
western painted turtles (85%), and coelacanths (77%), and a comparatively low 
identity to human MCHR1 (58%) and MCHR2 (38%), whereas chicken MCHR2 encodes a 
putative C-terminally truncated receptor and is likely a pseudogene. Using 
cell-based luciferase reporter assays or Western blot, we further demonstrated 
that chicken (and duck) MCHR4 could be potently activated by chicken MCH1-19, 
and its activation can elevate calcium concentration and activate MAPK/ERK and 
cAMP/PKA signaling pathways, indicating an important role of MCHR4 in mediating 
MCH actions in birds. Quantitative real-time PCR revealed that both cMCH and 
cMCHR4 mRNA are expressed in various brain regions including the hypothalamus, 
and cMCH expression in the hypothalamus of 3-week-old chicks could be induced by 
36-h fasting, indicating that cMCH expression is correlated with energy balance. 
Taken together, characterization of chicken MCH and MCHR4 will aid to uncover 
the conserved roles of MCH across vertebrates.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2017.03.009
PMID: 28300612 [Indexed for MEDLINE]361. CPT Pharmacometrics Syst Pharmacol. 2017 Jul;6(7):458-468. doi: 
10.1002/psp4.12199. Epub 2017 May 27.

Translational Modeling to Guide Study Design and Dose Choice in Obesity 
Exemplified by AZD1979, a Melanin-concentrating Hormone Receptor 1 Antagonist.

Gennemark P(1), Trägårdh M(1)(2), Lindén D(1), Ploj K(1), Johansson A(1), 
Turnbull A(1), Carlsson B(1), Antonsson M(1).

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular and Metabolic Diseases, Innovative Medicines and Early 
Development Biotech Unit, AstraZeneca, Mölndal, Sweden.
(2)University of Warwick, School of Engineering, Coventry, UK.

In this study, we present the translational modeling used in the discovery of 
AZD1979, a melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHr1) antagonist aimed for 
treatment of obesity. The model quantitatively connects the relevant biomarkers 
and thereby closes the scaling path from rodent to man, as well as from dose to 
effect level. The complexity of individual modeling steps depends on the quality 
and quantity of data as well as the prior information; from semimechanistic 
body-composition models to standard linear regression. Key predictions are 
obtained by standard forward simulation (e.g., predicting effect from exposure), 
as well as non-parametric input estimation (e.g., predicting energy intake from 
longitudinal body-weight data), across species. The work illustrates how 
modeling integrates data from several species, fills critical gaps between 
biomarkers, and supports experimental design and human dose-prediction. We 
believe this approach can be of general interest for translation in the obesity 
field, and might inspire translational reasoning more broadly.

© 2017 The Authors CPT: Pharmacometrics & Systems Pharmacology published by 
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of American Society for Clinical Pharmacology 
and Therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1002/psp4.12199
PMCID: PMC5529746
PMID: 28556607 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


362. ACS Med Chem Lett. 2017 May 4;8(6):648-653. doi:
10.1021/acsmedchemlett.7b00118.  eCollection 2017 Jun 8.

Systematic Data Mining Reveals Synergistic H3R/MCHR1 Ligands.

Schaller D(1), Hagenow S(2), Alpert G(2), Naß A(1), Schulz R(1), Bermudez M(1), 
Stark H(2), Wolber G(1).

Author information:
(1)Pharmaceutical and Medicinal Chemistry, Freie Universität Berlin, 
Königin-Luise-Str. 2+4, 14195 Berlin, Germany.
(2)Pharmaceutical and Medicinal Chemistry, Heinrich-Heine-Universität 
Düsseldorf, Universitätsstr. 1, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany.

In this study, we report a ligand-centric data mining approach that guided the 
identification of suitable target profiles for treating obesity. The newly 
developed method is based on identifying target pairs for synergistic positive 
effects and also encompasses the exclusion of compounds showing a detrimental 
effect on obesity treatment (off-targets). Ligands with known activity against 
obesity-relevant targets were compared using fingerprint representations. 
Similar compounds with activities to different targets were evaluated for the 
mechanism of action since activation or deactivation of drug targets determines 
the pharmacological effect. In vitro validation of the modeling results revealed 
that three known modulators of melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1) 
show a previously unknown submicromolar affinity to the histamine H3 receptor 
(H3R). This synergistic activity may present a novel therapeutic option against 
obesity.

DOI: 10.1021/acsmedchemlett.7b00118
PMCID: PMC5467185
PMID: 28626527

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.


363. Sci Rep. 2017 Aug 14;7(1):8054. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-08684-6.

In vivo evaluation of radiotracers targeting the melanin-concentrating hormone 
receptor 1: [(11)C]SNAP-7941 and [(18)F]FE@SNAP reveal specific uptake in the 
ventricular system.

Zeilinger M(1)(2), Dumanic M(1), Pichler F(1)(2), Budinsky L(3), Wadsak 
W(1)(4)(5), Pallitsch K(6), Spreitzer H(7), Lanzenberger R(8), Hacker M(1), 
Mitterhauser M(9)(10)(11), Philippe C(1)(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Imaging and Image-guided Therapy, Division of 
Nuclear Medicine, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(2)Department of Engineering, University of Applied Sciences Wiener Neustadt, 
Wiener Neustadt, Austria.
(3)Department of Biomedical Imaging and Image-guided Therapy, Division of 
Molecular and Gender Imaging, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(4)Department of Inorganic Chemistry, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(5)CBmed GmbH, Center for Biomarker Research in Medicine, Graz, Austria.
(6)Department of Organic Chemistry, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(7)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of Vienna, Vienna, 
Austria.
(8)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Medical University of Vienna, 
Vienna, Austria.
(9)Department of Biomedical Imaging and Image-guided Therapy, Division of 
Nuclear Medicine, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. 
markus.mitterhauser@meduniwien.ac.at.
(10)Department of Pharmaceutical Technology and Biopharmaceutics, University of 
Vienna, Vienna, Austria. markus.mitterhauser@meduniwien.ac.at.
(11)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Applied Diagnostics, Vienna, Austria. 
markus.mitterhauser@meduniwien.ac.at.
(12)Department of Pharmaceutical Technology and Biopharmaceutics, University of 
Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

The MCHR1 is involved in the regulation of energy homeostasis and changes of the 
expression are linked to a variety of associated diseases, such as diabetes and 
adiposity. The study aimed at the in vitro and in vivo evaluation of 
[11C]SNAP-7941 and [18F]FE@SNAP as potential PET-tracers for the MCHR1. 
Competitive binding studies with non-radioactive derivatives and small-animal 
PET/CT and MRI brain studies were performed under baseline conditions and tracer 
displacement with the unlabelled MCHR1 antagonist (±)-SNAP-7941. Binding studies 
evinced high binding affinity of the non-radioactive derivatives. Small-animal 
imaging of [11C]SNAP-7941 and [18F]FE@SNAP evinced high tracer uptake in 
MCHR1-rich regions of the ventricular system. Quantitative analysis depicted a 
significant tracer reduction after displacement with (±)-SNAP-7941. Due to the 
high binding affinity of the non-labelled derivatives and the high specific 
tracer uptake of [11C]SNAP-7941 and [18F]FE@SNAP, there is strong evidence that 
both radiotracers may serve as highly suitable agents for specific MCHR1 
imaging.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-08684-6
PMCID: PMC5556108
PMID: 28808288 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: This research was part of study funded by the 
Austrian Science Fund (FWF P20977-B09; P.I.: Markus Mitterhauser). No potential 
conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported.


364. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2017 Nov 1;253:44-52. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2017.08.021.
 Epub 2017 Aug 23.

Cytoskeleton-related regulation of primary cilia shortening mediated by 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1.

Tomoshige S(1), Kobayashi Y(1), Hosoba K(2), Hamamoto A(3), Miyamoto T(2), Saito 
Y(4).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Integrated Arts and Sciences, Hiroshima University, 
Hiroshima 739-8521, Japan.
(2)Department of Genetics and Cell Biology, Research Institute for Radiation 
Biology and Medicine, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima 734-8553, Japan.
(3)Molecular Genetics, Institute of Life Science, Kurume University, Fukuoka 
839-0864, Japan.
(4)Graduate School of Integrated Arts and Sciences, Hiroshima University, 
Hiroshima 739-8521, Japan. Electronic address: yumist@hiroshima-u.ac.jp.

Primary cilia are specialized microtubule-based organelles. Their importance is 
highlighted by the gamut of ciliary diseases associated with various syndromes 
including diabetes and obesity. Primary cilia serve as signaling hubs through 
selective interactions with ion channels and conventional G-protein-coupled 
receptors (GPCRs). Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) receptor 1 (MCHR1), a key 
regulator of feeding, is selectively expressed in neuronal primary cilia in 
distinct regions of the mouse brain. We previously found that MCH acts on 
ciliary MCHR1 and induces cilia shortening through a Gi/o-dependent Akt pathway 
with no cell cycle progression. Many factors can participate in cilia length 
control. However, the mechanisms for how these molecules are relocated and 
coordinated to activate cilia shortening are poorly understood. In the present 
study, we investigated the role of cytoskeletal dynamics in regulating 
MCH-induced cilia shortening using clonal MCHR1-expressing hTERT-RPE1 cells. 
Pharmacological and biochemical approaches showed that cilia shortening mediated 
by MCH was associated with increased soluble cytosolic tubulin without changing 
the total tubulin amount. Enhanced F-actin fiber intensity was also observed in 
MCH-treated cells. The actions of various pharmacological agents revealed that 
coordinated actin machinery, especially actin polymerization, was required for 
MCHR1-mediated cilia shortening. A recent report indicated the existence of 
actin-regulated machinery for cilia shortening through GPCR agonist-dependent 
ectosome release. However, our live-cell imaging experiments showed that MCH 
progressively elicited cilia shortening without exclusion of 
fluorescence-positive material from the tip. Short cilia phenotypes have been 
associated with various metabolic disorders. Thus, the present findings may 
contribute toward better understanding of how the cytoskeleton is involved in 
the GPCR ligand-triggered cilia shortening with cell mechanical properties that 
underlies clinical manifestations such as obesity.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2017.08.021
PMID: 28842217 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Neuropharmacology. 2018 Jan;128:22-32. doi:
10.1016/j.neuropharm.2017.09.008.  Epub 2017 Sep 6.

Melanin concentrating hormone modulates oxytocin-mediated marble burying.

Sanathara NM(1), Garau C(2), Alachkar A(1), Wang L(1), Wang Z(1), Nishimori 
K(3), Xu X(4), Civelli O(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of California, Irvine, CA, 92697, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of California, Irvine, CA, 
92697, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, Graduate School of Agricultural 
Science, Tohoku University, 1-1 Tsutsumidori-Amamiyamachi, Aoba-ku, Sendai, 
Miyagi, 981-8555, Japan.
(4)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, University of California, Irvine, CA, 
92697, USA.
(5)Department of Pharmacology, University of California, Irvine, CA, 92697, USA; 
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of California, Irvine, CA, 
92697, USA; Department of Developmental and Cell Biology, University of 
California, Irvine, CA, 92697, USA. Electronic address: ocivelli@uci.edu.

Repetitive and perseverative behaviors are common features of a number of 
neuropsychiatric diseases such as Angelman's syndrome, Tourette's syndrome, 
obsessive-compulsive disorder, and autism spectrum disorders. The oxytocin 
system has been linked to the regulation of repetitive behavior in both animal 
models and humans, but many of its downstream targets have still to be found. We 
report that the melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) system is a target of the 
oxytocin system in regulating one repetitive behavior, marble burying. First we 
report that nearly 60% of MCH neurons express oxytocin receptors, and 
demonstrate using rabies mediated tract tracing that MCH neurons receive direct 
presynaptic input from oxytocin neurons. Then we show that MCH receptor knockout 
(MCHR1KO) mice and MCH ablated animals display increased marble burying response 
while central MCH infusion decreases it. Finally, we demonstrate the downstream 
role of the MCH system on oxytocin mediated marble burying by showing that 
central infusions of MCH and oxytocin alone or together reduce it while 
antagonizing the MCH system blocks oxytocin-mediated reduction of this behavior. 
Our findings reveal a novel role for the MCH system as a mediator of the role of 
oxytocin in regulating marble-burying behavior in mice.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2017.09.008
PMCID: PMC5830107
PMID: 28888943 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Funding and disclosure The authors declare no 
conflict of interest.


366. Brain Behav. 2017 Dec 15;8(1):e00881. doi: 10.1002/brb3.881. eCollection
2018  Jan.

Bombesin receptor subtype-3-expressing neurons regulate energy homeostasis 
through a novel neuronal pathway in the hypothalamus.

Maruyama M(1), Hotta N(1), Nio Y(2), Hamagami K(1), Nagi T(3), Funata M(4), 
Sakamoto J(4), Nakakariya M(5), Amano N(5), Nishida M(6), Okawa T(3), Arikawa 
Y(3), Sasaki S(7), Kasai S(1), Nagisa Y(1)(8), Habata Y(1)(9), Mori M(1).

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular and Metabolic Drug Discovery Unit Takeda Pharmaceutical 
Company Limited Kanagawa Japan.
(2)Extra Value Generation & General Medicine Drug Discovery Unit Takeda 
Pharmaceutical Company Limited Kanagawa Japan.
(3)Central Nervous System Drug Discovery Unit Takeda Pharmaceutical Company 
Limited Kanagawa Japan.
(4)Biomolecular Research Laboratories Takeda Pharmaceutical Company Limited 
Kanagawa Japan.
(5)Drug Metabolism and Pharmacokinetics Research LaboratoriesTakeda 
Pharmaceutical Company Limited Kanagawa Japan.
(6)Integrated Technology Research Laboratories Takeda Pharmaceutical Company 
Limited Kanagawa Japan.
(7)Medicinal Chemistry Research Laboratories Pharmaceutical Research Division 
Takeda Pharmaceutical Company Limited Kanagawa Japan.
(8)Present address: CVM Marketing Japan Pharma Business UnitTakeda 
Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd.12-10, Nihonbashi 2-Chome, Chuo-ku Tokyo 103-8686 Japan.
(9)Present address: Foods & Nutrients Yamanashi Gakuin Junior College Sakaori 
2-4-5, Kofu Yamanashi 400-8575 Japan.

OBJECTIVES: Bombesin receptor subtype-3 (BRS-3) has been suggested to play a 
potential role in energy homeostasis. However, the physiological mechanism of 
BRS-3 on energy homeostasis remains unknown. Thus, we investigated the 
BRS-3-mediated neuronal pathway involved in food intake and energy expenditure.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Expression of BRS-3 in the rat brain was histologically 
examined. The BRS-3 neurons activated by refeeding-induced satiety or a BRS-3 
agonist were identified by c-Fos immunostaining. We also analyzed expression 
changes in feeding-relating peptides in the brain of fasted rats administered 
with the BRS-3 agonist.
RESULTS: In the paraventricular hypothalamic nucleus (PVH), dorsomedial 
hypothalamic nucleus (DMH), and medial preoptic area (MPA), strong c-Fos 
induction was observed in the BRS-3 neurons especially in PVH after refeeding. 
However, the BRS-3 neurons in the PVH did not express feeding-regulating 
peptides, while the BRS-3 agonist administration induced c-Fos expression in the 
DMH and MPA, which were not refeeding-sensitive, as well as in the PVH. The 
BRS-3 agonist administration changed the Pomc and Cart mRNA level in several 
brain regions of fasted rats.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that BRS-3 neurons in the PVH are a novel 
functional subdivision in the PVH that regulates feeding behavior. As the MPA 
and DMH are reportedly involved in thermoregulation and energy metabolism, the 
BRS-3 neurons in the MPA/DMH might mediate the energy expenditure control. POMC 
and CART may contribute to BRS-3 neuron-mediated energy homeostasis regulation. 
In summary, BRS-3-expressing neurons could regulate energy homeostasis through a 
novel neuronal pathway.

DOI: 10.1002/brb3.881
PMCID: PMC5853643
PMID: 29568682 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Peptides. 2018 Jun;104:50-61. doi: 10.1016/j.peptides.2018.04.009. Epub 2018
Apr  20.

Distribution of MCH-containing fibers in the feline brainstem: Relevance for REM 
sleep regulation.

Costa A(1), Castro-Zaballa S(1), Lagos P(1), Chase MH(2), Torterolo P(3).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Fisiología, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de la 
República, Uruguay.
(2)WebSciences International and UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles, USA.
(3)Departamento de Fisiología, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de la 
República, Uruguay. Electronic address: ptortero@fmed.edu.uy.

Neurons that utilize melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) as a neuromodulator are 
localized in the postero-lateral hypothalamus and incerto-hypothalamic area. 
These neurons project diffusely throughout the central nervous system and have 
been implicated in critical physiological processes, such as sleep. Unlike 
rodents, in the order carnivora as well as in humans, MCH exerts its biological 
functions through two receptors: MCHR-1 and MCHR-2. Hence, the cat is an optimal 
animal to model MCHergic functions in humans. In the present study, we examined 
the distribution of MCH-positive fibers in the brainstem of the cat. MCHergic 
axons with distinctive varicosities and boutons were heterogeneously 
distributed, exhibiting different densities in distinct regions of the 
brainstem. High density of MCHergic fibers was found in the dorsal raphe 
nucleus, the laterodorsal tegmental nucleus, the periaqueductal gray, the 
pendunculopontine tegmental nucleus, the locus coeruleus and the prepositus 
hypoglossi. Because these areas are involved in the control of REM sleep, the 
present anatomical data support the role of this neuropeptidergic system in the 
control of this behavioral state.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.peptides.2018.04.009
PMID: 29680268 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Neuroscience. 2018 Jul 15;383:160-169. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroscience.2018.05.005.  Epub 2018 May 18.

Depression-resistant Phenotype in Mice Overexpressing Regulator of G Protein 
Signaling 8 (RGS8).

Kobayashi Y(1), Takemoto R(1), Yamato S(1), Okada T(1), Iijima M(2), Uematsu 
Y(2), Chaki S(2), Saito Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Integrated Arts and Sciences, Hiroshima University, 
Hiroshima 739-8521, Japan.
(2)Research Headquarters, Taisho Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd., Saitama 331-9530, 
Japan.
(3)Graduate School of Integrated Arts and Sciences, Hiroshima University, 
Hiroshima 739-8521, Japan. Electronic address: yumist@hiroshima-u.ac.jp.

Regulator of G protein signaling (RGS) proteins are negative regulators of 
heterotrimeric G proteins that act by accelerating Gα-mediated GTPase activity 
to terminate G protein-coupled receptor-associated signaling. RGS8 is expressed 
in several brain regions involved with movement and mood. To investigate the 
role of RGS8 in vivo, we generated transgenic mice overexpressing brain RGS8 
(RGS8tg). RGS8 gene and protein expressions were examined by real-time PCR and 
immunohistochemistry, respectively, and a significant increase in RGS8 protein 
was detected in the hippocampal CA1 region compared with wild-type mice (WT). We 
characterized the phenotypic traits, and found that RGS8tg showed decreased 
depressive-like behavior in the forced swimming test (FST). Previously, RGS8 was 
identified as a potent negative regulator of melanin-concentrating hormone 
receptor 1 (MCHR1), whose activation is mainly involved in energy homeostasis 
and emotional processing. Interestingly, acute oral administration of MCHR1 
antagonist SNAP94847 did not have antidepressant-like effects on RGS8tg in the 
FST, but did show antidepressant effects on WT. In contrast, selective 
noradrenaline reuptake inhibitor desipramine had a significant effect on RGS8tg 
in the FST. MCHR1 is enriched in a subset of primary cilia, as sensory 
organelles that mediate extracellular signaling. Immunohistochemical analyses 
revealed significant elongation of MCHR1-positive cilia in the CA1 region of 
RGS8tg compared with WT. Taken together, these findings suggest that RGS8 
participates in modulation of depression-like behavior through ciliary MCHR1 
expressed in the CA1 region. The present study may support the possible 
modulation of RGS8 function in mood disorders.

Copyright © 2018 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2018.05.005
PMID: 29758252 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Genesis. 2018 Aug;56(8):e23217. doi: 10.1002/dvg.23217.

A CreER mouse to study melanin concentrating hormone signaling in the developing 
brain.

Engle SE(1), Antonellis PJ(1), Whitehouse LS(1), Bansal R(1), Emond MR(2), 
Jontes JD(2), Kesterson RA(3), Mykytyn K(4), Berbari NF(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis, 
Indianapolis, Indiana.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, College of Medicine, Ohio State University, 
Columbus, Ohio.
(3)Department of Genetics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, 
Alabama.
(4)Department of Biological Chemistry and Pharmacology, College of Medicine, 
Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio.

The neuropeptide, melanin concentrating hormone (MCH), and its G protein-coupled 
receptor, melanin concentrating hormone receptor 1 (Mchr1), are expressed 
centrally in adult rodents. MCH signaling has been implicated in diverse 
behaviors such as feeding, sleep, anxiety, as well as addiction and reward. 
While a model utilizing the Mchr1 promoter to drive constitutive expression of 
Cre recombinase (Mchr1-Cre) exists, there is a need for an inducible Mchr1-Cre 
to determine the roles for this signaling pathway in neural development and 
adult neuronal function. Here, we generated a BAC transgenic mouse where the 
Mchr1 promotor drives expression of tamoxifen inducible CreER recombinase. Many 
aspects of the Mchr1-Cre expression pattern are recapitulated by the Mchr1-CreER 
model, though there are also notable differences. Most strikingly, compared to 
the constitutive model, the new Mchr1-CreER model shows strong expression in 
adult animals in hypothalamic brain regions involved in feeding behavior but 
diminished expression in regions involved in reward, such as the nucleus 
accumbens. The inducible Mchr1-CreER allele will help reveal the potential for 
Mchr1 signaling to impact neural development and subsequent behavioral 
phenotypes, as well as contribute to the understanding of the MCH signaling 
pathway in terminally differentiated adult neurons and the diverse behaviors 
that it influences.

© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/dvg.23217
PMCID: PMC6167158
PMID: 29806135 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Mol Imaging Biol. 2019 Apr;21(2):257-268. doi: 10.1007/s11307-018-1212-0.

SNAPshots of the MCHR1: a Comparison Between the PET-Tracers [(18)F]FE@SNAP and 
[(11)C]SNAP-7941.

Philippe C(1)(2), Zeilinger M(1)(3), Dumanic M(1), Pichler F(1)(3), Fetty 
L(1)(4), Vraka C(1), Balber T(1), Wadsak W(1)(5)(6), Pallitsch K(7), Spreitzer 
H(8), Lanzenberger R(9), Hacker M(1), Mitterhauser M(10)(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Imaging and Image-guided Therapy, Division of 
Nuclear Medicine, Medical University of Vienna, Waehringer Guertel 18-20, 1090, 
Vienna, Austria.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Technology and Biopharmaceutics, University of 
Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(3)Faculty of Engineering, University of Applied Sciences Wiener Neustadt, 
Neustadt, Austria.
(4)Department of Radiotherapy, Division of Medical Physics, Medical University 
of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(5)Department of Inorganic Chemistry, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(6)CBmed, Graz, Austria.
(7)Department of Organic Chemistry, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(8)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of Vienna, Vienna, 
Austria.
(9)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Medical University of Vienna, 
Vienna, Austria.
(10)Department of Biomedical Imaging and Image-guided Therapy, Division of 
Nuclear Medicine, Medical University of Vienna, Waehringer Guertel 18-20, 1090, 
Vienna, Austria. markus.mitterhauser@meduniwien.ac.at.
(11)Department of Pharmaceutical Technology and Biopharmaceutics, University of 
Vienna, Vienna, Austria. markus.mitterhauser@meduniwien.ac.at.
(12)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute Applied Diagnostics, Vienna, Austria. 
markus.mitterhauser@meduniwien.ac.at.

PURPOSE: The melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1) has become an 
important pharmacological target, since it may be involved in various diseases, 
such as diabetes, insulin resistance, and obesity. Hence, a suitable positron 
emission tomography radiotracer for the in vivo assessment of the MCHR1 
pharmacology is imperative. The current paper contrasts the extensive in vitro, 
in vivo, and ex vivo assessments of the radiotracers [18F]FE@SNAP and 
[11C]SNAP-7941 and provides comprehensive information about their biological and 
physicochemical properties. Furthermore, it examines their suitability for 
first-in-man imaging studies.
PROCEDURES: Kinetic real-time cell-binding studies with [18F]FE@SNAP and 
[11C]SNAP-7941 were conducted on adherent Chines hamster ovary (CHO-K1) cells 
stably expressing the human MCHR1 and MCHR2. Small animal imaging studies on 
mice and rats were performed under displacement and baseline conditions, as well 
as after pretreatment with the P-glycoprotein/breast cancer resistant protein 
inhibitor tariquidar. After the imaging studies, detailed analyses of the ex 
vivo biodistribution were performed. Ex vivo metabolism was determined in rat 
blood and brain and analyzed at various time points using a quantitative 
radio-HPLC assay.
RESULTS: [11C]SNAP-7941 demonstrates high uptake on CHO-K1-hMCHR1 cells, whereas 
no uptake was detected for the CHO-K1-hMCHR2 cells. In contrast, [18F]FE@SNAP 
evinced binding to CHO-K1-hMCHR1 and CHO-K1-hMCHR2 cells. Imaging studies with 
[18F]FE@SNAP and [11C]SNAP-7941 showed an increased brain uptake after 
tariquidar pretreatment in mice, as well as in rats, and exhibited a significant 
difference between the time-activity curves of the baseline and blocking groups. 
Biodistribution of both tracers demonstrated a decreased uptake after 
displacement. [11C]SNAP-7941 revealed a high metabolic stability in rats, 
whereas [18F]FE@SNAP was rapidly metabolized.
CONCLUSIONS: Both radiotracers demonstrate appropriate imaging properties for 
the MCHR1. However, the pronounced metabolic stability as well as superior 
selectivity and affinity of [11C]SNAP-7941 underlines the decisive superiority 
over [18F]FE@SNAP.

DOI: 10.1007/s11307-018-1212-0
PMCID: PMC6449294
PMID: 29948643 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest.


371. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2018 Dec;175:53-61. doi: 10.1016/j.pbb.2018.09.002.
 Epub 2018 Sep 6.

Postnatal overnutrition alters the orexigenic effects of melanin-concentrating 
hormone (MCH) and reduces MCHR1 hypothalamic expression on spontaneous feeding 
and fasting.

Pérez-Morales M(1), Hurtado-Alvarado G(2), Morales-Hernández I(2), 
Gómez-González B(3), Domínguez-Salazar E(2), Velázquez-Moctezuma J(4).

Author information:
(1)Area of Neurosciences, Department of Biology of Reproduction, CBS, 
Universidad Autónoma Metropolitana, Unidad Iztapalapa, México City, México. 
Electronic address: rasnochintsi@gmail.com.
(2)Area of Neurosciences, Department of Biology of Reproduction, CBS, 
Universidad Autónoma Metropolitana, Unidad Iztapalapa, México City, México.
(3)Area of Neurosciences, Department of Biology of Reproduction, CBS, 
Universidad Autónoma Metropolitana, Unidad Iztapalapa, México City, México. 
Electronic address: bgomez@xanum.uam.mx.
(4)Area of Neurosciences, Department of Biology of Reproduction, CBS, 
Universidad Autónoma Metropolitana, Unidad Iztapalapa, México City, México. 
Electronic address: jvm@xanum.uam.mx.

One of the approaches to induce obesity in rodents consists in reducing litter 
size to 3 pups during the lactation period. Animals submitted to this 
manipulation are heavier, hyperphagic and develop several metabolic diseases for 
the rest of their lives. In the present study, under the premise that 
melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH), an orexigenic peptide synthesized by 
neurons of the lateral hypothalamus, is involved in food intake regulation, we 
aimed to measure the hypothalamic expression of its receptor, MCHR1, in adult 
early overfed obese animals and normoweight controls at both ad libitum and food 
deprived conditions. Additionally, we administered MCH, or an antiMCH antibody, 
into the third ventricle of ad libitum-fed rats, or fasted rats, respectively, 
and evaluated chow consumption. Typical nocturnal hyperphagia in rodents was 
elevated in obese animals compared to normoweight controls, accompanied by a 
lower expression of MCHR1 and leptin receptor (Ob-R). Following a 24 h fasting, 
MCHR1 remained lower in SL rats. After 4 h of re-feeding, obese animals ate more 
than normoweight controls. MCH failed to enhance appetite in early overfed obese 
animals and immunoneutralization of the peptide only reduced fasted 
induced-hyperphagia in normoweight controls. These results support the notion 
that both peptide and brain endogenous MCH exert a physiological relevant action 
in food intake regulation in normoweight rats, but that postnatal overnutrition 
disturbs this system, as reflected by MCHR1 downregulation at both ad libitum 
and fasted conditions and in the lack of response to MCH in both positive- and 
negative-energetic states in early overfed obese animals.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pbb.2018.09.002
PMID: 30196088 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2018 Dec 1;21(12):1128-1137. doi: 
10.1093/ijnp/pyy088.

Melanin-Concentrating Hormone (MCH) and MCH-R1 in the Locus Coeruleus May Be 
Involved in the Regulation of Depressive-Like Behavior.

Ye H(1), Cui XY(1), Ding H(1), Cui SY(1), Hu X(1), Liu YT(1), Zhao HL(1), Zhang 
YH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Peking University, School of Basic Medical 
Science, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Previous anatomical and behavioral studies have shown that 
melanin-concentrating hormone is involved in the modulation of emotional states. 
However, little is known about brain regions other than the dorsal raphe nucleus 
that relate the melanin-concentrating hormone-ergic system to depressive states. 
Numerous studies have shown that the locus coeruleus is involved in the 
regulation of depression and sleep. Although direct physiological evidence is 
lacking, previous studies suggest that melanin-concentrating hormone release in 
the locus coeruleus decreases neuronal discharge. However, remaining unclear is 
whether the melanin-concentrating hormone-ergic system in the locus coeruleus is 
related to depressive-like behavior.
METHOD: We treated rats with an intra-locus coeruleus injection of 
melanin-concentrating hormone, intracerebroventricular injection of 
melanin-concentrating hormone, or chronic subcutaneous injections of 
corticosterone to induce different depressive-like phenotypes. We then assessed 
the effects of the melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 antagonist 
SNAP-94847 on depressive-like behavior in the forced swim test and the sucrose 
preference test.
RESULTS: The intra-locus coeruleus and intracerebroventricular injections of 
melanin-concentrating hormone and chronic injections of corticosterone increased 
immobility time in the forced swim test and decreased sucrose preference in the 
sucrose preference test. All these depressive-like behaviors were reversed by an 
intra-locus coeruleus microinjection of SNAP-94847.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that the melanin-concentrating hormone-ergic 
system in the locus coeruleus might play an important role in the regulation of 
depressive-like behavior.

DOI: 10.1093/ijnp/pyy088
PMCID: PMC6276047
PMID: 30335150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Drug Dev Ind Pharm. 2019 May;45(5):819-825. doi:
10.1080/03639045.2019.1576721.  Epub 2019 Feb 13.

Some observations on the liquid crystalline and gel behaviors of aqueous 
dispersions of a prodrug.

Tao L(1), Li J(1), Pinamanenni S(1), Raghavan K(1).

Author information:
(1)a Drug Product Science and Technology, Bristol-Myers Squibb Company , New 
Brunswick , NJ, USA.

BMS-830216 is a diprotic acid prodrug of two pKa values (<2 and 6.8) with high 
apparent solubility at pH ≥ 7. At ∼ pH 4 solutions of BMS-830216 appear to be 
surface active, in which their surface tension can be reduced from 72 to 65 
dynes when its concentrations is above the critical aggregation concentration 
(CAC∼0.2 mM). Additionally, at this pH, BMS-830216 tends to form liquid 
crystalline phases (at ≥ 2 mg/mL) in acetate buffer when using tris salt. 
Furthermore, after raising the concentration beyond 20 mg/g, formation of 
gel-like dispersions was noted. These gel-like dispersions exhibited a strong 
elastic strength, significantly impacting the dissolution behavior of the tris 
salt. Mechanistically, it is likely that BMS-830216 tris salt in solution first 
forms a lamellar phase followed by formation of a gel phase at higher 
concentrations (≥20 mg/mL). As indicated by SAXS, the lamellar phase formed 
seems to have two d-spacing values (∼5 nm and ∼10 nm (weak), which seems to 
correspond to two molecules connected tail by tail (5 nm). Further investigation 
is needed for phase identification, as their properties can affect the physical 
behavior of BMS-830216 in the development of pharmaceutical dosage forms.

DOI: 10.1080/03639045.2019.1576721
PMID: 30715959 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Front Genet. 2019 Feb 12;10:75. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2019.00075. eCollection
2019.

Microscopy-Based Automated Live Cell Screening for Small Molecules That Affect 
Ciliation.

Zhang P(1)(2), Kiseleva AA(2)(3), Korobeynikov V(2)(4), Liu H(1), Einarson 
MB(2), Golemis EA(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmacy, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, China.
(2)Molecular Therapeutics Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA, 
United States.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Kazan Federal University, 
Kazan, Russia.
(4)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University, New York, NY, 
United States.

The primary monocilium, or cilium, is a single antenna-like organelle that 
protrudes from the surface of most mammalian cell types, and serves as a 
signaling hub. Mutations of cilia-associated genes result in severe genetic 
disorders termed ciliopathies. Among these, the most common is autosomal 
dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD); less common genetic diseases include 
Bardet-Biedl syndrome, Joubert syndrome, nephronophthisis, and others. Important 
signaling cascades with receptor systems localized exclusively or in part at 
cilia include Sonic Hedgehog (SHH), platelet derived growth factor alpha 
(PDGFRα), WNTs, polycystins, and others. Changes in ciliation during development 
or in pathological conditions such as cancer impacts signaling by these 
proteins. Notably, ciliation status of cells is coupled closely to the cell 
cycle, with cilia protruding in quiescent (G0) or early G1 cells, declining in 
S/G2, and absent in M phase, and has been proposed to contribute to cell cycle 
regulation. Because of this complex biology, the elaborate machinery regulating 
ciliary assembly and disassembly receives input from many cellular proteins 
relevant to cell cycle control, development, and oncogenic transformation, 
making study of genetic factors and drugs influencing ciliation of high 
interest. One of the most effective tools to investigate the dynamics of the 
cilia under different conditions is the imaging of live cells. However, 
developing assays to observe the primary cilium in real time can be challenging, 
and requires a consideration of multiple details related to the cilia biology. 
With the dual goals of identifying small molecules that may have beneficial 
activity through action on human diseases, and of identifying ciliary activities 
of existing agents that are in common use or development, we here describe 
creation and evaluation of three autofluorescent cell lines derived from the 
immortalized retinal pigmented epithelium parental cell line hTERT-RPE1. These 
cell lines stably express the ciliary-targeted fluorescent proteins 
L13-Arl13bGFP, pEGFP-mSmo, and tdTomato-MCHR1-N-10. We then describe methods for 
use of these cell lines in high throughput screening of libraries of small 
molecule compounds to identify positive and negative regulators of ciliary 
disassembly.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2019.00075
PMCID: PMC6379280
PMID: 30809247


375. J Chem Neuroanat. 2019 Jul;98:55-62. doi: 10.1016/j.jchemneu.2019.03.003.
Epub  2019 Mar 31.

Melanin-concentrating hormone receptor-1 is located in primary cilia of the 
dorsal raphe neurons.

Niño-Rivero S(1), Torterolo P(1), Lagos P(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, Universidad de la República, 
Montevideo, Uruguay.
(2)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, Universidad de la República, 
Montevideo, Uruguay. Electronic address: plagos@fmed.edu.uy.

The melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a peptidergic neuromodulator 
synthesized by neurons of the posterior hypothalamus and incerto-hypothalamic 
area. These neurons project throughout the central nervous system, including the 
dorsal raphe nucleus (DRN). In rodents, MCH exerts its biological functions 
through the MCHR-1 receptor. We previously demonstrated that intra-DRN MCH 
administration increases REM sleep time and induces a pro-depressive behavior. 
We also determined that MCH modulates the neuronal firing rate and serotonin 
release within this nucleus. Previous studies in mice identified the presence of 
MCHR-1 in neurons located in the olfactory tubercle, hypothalamus, and nucleus 
accumbens, in a specialized neuronal appendage: the neuronal primary cilia. 
However, the subcellular location of MCHR-1 protein in the DRN is still unknown. 
Hence, the aim of the present study was to explore, by means of single and 
double immunohistochemical procedures, whether MCHR-1 is present in neuronal 
primary cilia in serotonergic and GABAergic neurons located in the DRN of the 
rat. We demonstrated colocalization of MCHR-1 with type III adenylyl cyclase 
(AC-III), a neuronal ciliary marker, in the DRN and confirmed their 
colocalization in the hippocampus and cerebral cortex of the rat. We quantified 
the proportion of serotoninergic and GABAergic neurons that coexpress MCHR-1 at 
the mid-caudal and mid-rostral levels of the DRN: 4% and 12%, respectively. 
Furthermore, approximately 10% of the total number of MCHR-1 immunoreactive 
primary cilia belonged to serotonergic neurons, whilst 12% were appendages of 
GABAergic neurons. These morphological data allow us to conclude that the 
mechanism by which MCH modulates the activity of DRN neurons is through MCHR-1 
receptors present in the primary cilia of different neurochemical phenotypes. 
New experiments are needed to understand the functional rationale of the 
unexpected localization of these receptors and to explore their presence in 
other neuronal phenotypes.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jchemneu.2019.03.003
PMID: 30943431 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Neurochem Res. 2019 Jul;44(7):1736-1744. doi: 10.1007/s11064-019-02806-4.
Epub  2019 Apr 29.

Characterization of Functional Primary Cilia in Human Induced Pluripotent Stem 
Cell-Derived Neurons.

Miki D(1), Kobayashi Y(1), Okada T(1), Miyamoto T(2), Takei N(3), Sekino Y(4), 
Koganezawa N(5), Shirao T(5), Saito Y(6).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Integrated Arts and Sciences, Hiroshima University, 1-7-1 
Kagamiyama, Higashi-Hiroshima, Hiroshima, 739-8521, Japan.
(2)Department of Genetics and Cell Biology, Research Institute for Radiation 
Biology and Medicine, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, 734-8553, Japan.
(3)Department of Molecular Neurobiology, Brain Research Institute, Niigata 
University, Niigata, 951-8585, Japan.
(4)Laboratory of Chemical Pharmacology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, 113-0033, Japan.
(5)Department of Neurobiology and Behavior, Graduate School of Medicine, Gunma 
University, Maebashi, 371-8511, Japan.
(6)Graduate School of Integrated Arts and Sciences, Hiroshima University, 1-7-1 
Kagamiyama, Higashi-Hiroshima, Hiroshima, 739-8521, Japan. 
yumist@hiroshima-u.ac.jp.

Recent advances in human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) offer new 
possibilities for biomedical research and clinical applications. Neurons 
differentiated from hiPSCs may be promising tools to develop novel treatment 
methods for various neurological diseases. However, the detailed process 
underlying functional maturation of hiPSC-derived neurons remains poorly 
understood. Here, we analyze the developmental architecture of hiPSC-derived 
cortical neurons, iCell GlutaNeurons, focusing on the primary cilium, a single 
sensory organelle that protrudes from the surface of most growth-arrested 
vertebrate cells. To characterize the neuronal cilia, cells were cultured for 
various periods and evaluated immunohistochemically by co-staining with 
antibodies against ciliary markers Arl13b and MAP2. Primary cilia were detected 
in neurons within days, and their prevalence and length increased with 
increasing days in culture. Treatment with the mood stabilizer lithium led to 
primary cilia length elongation, while treatment with the orexigenic 
neuropeptide melanin-concentrating hormone caused cilia length shortening in 
iCell GlutaNeurons. The present findings suggest that iCell GlutaNeurons develop 
neuronal primary cilia together with the signaling machinery for regulation of 
cilia length. Our approach to the primary cilium as a cellular antenna can be 
useful for both assessment of neuronal maturation and validation of 
pharmaceutical agents in hiPSC-derived neurons.

DOI: 10.1007/s11064-019-02806-4
PMID: 31037609 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Brain Res. 2019 Sep 15;1719:71-76. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2019.05.021. Epub
 2019 May 20.

The role of Olfaction in MCH-regulated spontaneous maternal responses.

Alhassen L(1), Phan A(1), Alhassen W(1), Nguyen P(1), Lo A(1), Shaharuddin H(1), 
Sanathara N(1), Civelli O(2), Alachkar A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, 369 Med Surge II, University 
of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697-4625, United States.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, 369 Med Surge II, University 
of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697-4625, United States; Department of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Medicine, 369 Med Surge II, University of 
California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697-4625, United States; Department of 
Developmental and Cell Biology, School of Medicine, 369 Med Surge II, University 
of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697-4625, United States.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Medicine, 369 Med Surge II, 
University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697-4625, United States. 
Electronic address: aalachka@uci.edu.

Melanin concentrating hormone (MCH) is involved in the initiation of maternal 
behavior during the postpartum period. Virgin females also display some aspects 
of maternal care independent of the hormonal and neurochemical changes 
associated with pregnancy and parturition. Maternal behavior in virgin females 
is triggered by pups-generated chemosensory signals. We therefore examined the 
role of MCH in maternal-related behaviors in virgin mice and whether it involves 
chemosensory mechanisms. We used mice with germline knock-out of MCH receptor 
(MCHR1 KO) and mice with conditional ablation of MCH neurons (MCH cKO) using 
Cre-inducible diphtheria toxin (iDTR) system. We report that germline deletion 
of MCHR1 and ablation of MCH neurons impair spontaneous maternal behavior that 
is induced upon pups' exposure. The latency and duration to retrieve pups by 
MCHR1 KO and MCH cKO mice are longer than their control littermate mice. In 
support of this finding, we found that in the three-chamber social test, both 
MCHR1 KO and MCH cKO mice display a lack of interest in interacting with pups. 
Strikingly, however, we found that while MCHR1 KO mice were unable to detect 
pups' chemosensory signals and displayed impairment in general olfactory 
discrimination, MCH cKO mice exhibited normal olfactory function. Our findings 
indicate that the lack of MCHR1 or of normal MCH levels causes defects in 
maternal behavior in non-sensitized virgin mice, and that disruption of the 
olfactory signaling might not count for these defects.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2019.05.021
PMID: 31121161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Curr Biol. 2019 Jun 17;29(12):1976-1987.e4. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2019.05.009.
Epub  2019 May 30.

Dynamic REM Sleep Modulation by Ambient Temperature and the Critical Role of the 
Melanin-Concentrating Hormone System.

Komagata N(1), Latifi B(1), Rusterholz T(2), Bassetti CLA(3), Adamantidis A(4), 
Schmidt MH(5).

Author information:
(1)Bern University Hospital (Inselspital), University of Bern, 3010 Bern, 
Switzerland.
(2)Center for Experimental Neurology, Department of Neurology, Bern University 
Hospital (Inselspital), University of Bern, 3010 Bern, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Neurology, Bern University Hospital (Inselspital), University 
of Bern, Freiburgstrasse 18, 3010 Bern, Switzerland.
(4)Center for Experimental Neurology, Department of Neurology, Bern University 
Hospital (Inselspital), University of Bern, 3010 Bern, Switzerland; Department 
of Biomedical Research (DBMR), Bern University Hospital (Inselspital), 
University of Bern, 3010 Bern, Switzerland.
(5)Center for Experimental Neurology, Department of Neurology, Bern University 
Hospital (Inselspital), University of Bern, 3010 Bern, Switzerland; Department 
of Neurology, Bern University Hospital (Inselspital), University of Bern, 
Freiburgstrasse 18, 3010 Bern, Switzerland; Ohio Sleep Medicine Institute, 4975 
Bradenton Avenue, Dublin, OH 43017, USA. Electronic address: 
markus.schmidt@insel.ch.

Comment in
    Curr Biol. 2019 Jul 8;29(13):R644-R646.

Ambient temperature (Ta) warming toward the high end of the thermoneutral zone 
(TNZ) preferentially increases rapid eye movement (REM) sleep over non-REM 
(NREM) sleep across species. The control and function of this 
temperature-induced REM sleep expression have remained unknown. 
Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) neurons play an important role in REM sleep 
control. We hypothesize that the MCH system may modulate REM sleep as a function 
of Ta. Here, we show that wild-type (WT) mice dynamically increased REM sleep 
durations specifically during warm Ta pulsing within the TNZ, compared to both 
the TNZ cool and baseline constant Ta conditions, without significantly 
affecting either wake or NREM sleep durations. However, genetically engineered 
MCH receptor-1 knockout (MCHR1-KO) mice showed no significant changes in REM 
sleep as a function of Ta, even with increased sleep pressure following a 4-h 
sleep deprivation. Using MCH-cre mice transduced with channelrhodopsin, we then 
optogenetically activated MCH neurons time locked with Ta warming, showing an 
increase in REM sleep expression beyond what Ta warming in yellow fluorescent 
protein (YFP) control mice achieved. Finally, in mice transduced with 
archaerhodopsin-T, semi-chronic optogenetic MCH neuronal silencing during Ta 
warming completely blocked the increase in REM sleep seen in YFP controls. These 
data demonstrate a previously unknown role for the MCH system in the dynamic 
output expression of REM sleep during Ta manipulation. These findings are 
consistent with the energy allocation hypothesis of sleep function, suggesting 
that endotherms have evolved neural circuits to opportunistically express REM 
sleep when the need for thermoregulatory defense is minimized.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2019.05.009
PMID: 31155350 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2019 Jun 11;10:324. doi:
10.3389/fendo.2019.00324.  eCollection 2019.

In vitro Radiopharmaceutical Evidence for MCHR1 Binding Sites in Murine Brown 
Adipocytes.

Balber T(1)(2), Benčurová K(1)(3), Kiefer FW(4), Kulterer OC(1)(4), Klebermass 
EM(1)(2), Egger G(5)(6), Tran L(5), Wagner KH(3), Viernstein H(2), Pallitsch 
K(7), Spreitzer H(8), Hacker M(1), Wadsak W(1)(9), Mitterhauser M(1)(5), 
Philippe C(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nuclear Medicine, Biomedical Imaging and Image-Guided Therapy, 
Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Technology and Biopharmaceutics, Faculty of Life 
Sciences, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(3)Department of Nutritional Sciences, Faculty of Life Sciences, University of 
Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(4)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine III, Medical 
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(5)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute Applied Diagnostics, Vienna, Austria.
(6)Department of Pathology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(7)Institute of Organic Chemistry, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(8)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Faculty of Life Sciences, University 
of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(9)Center for Biomarker Research in Medicine - CBmed, GmbH, Graz, Austria.

[11C]SNAP-7941 and its radiofluorinated, fluoro-ethyl derivative [18F]FE@SNAP 
have been developed as the first positron emission tomography tracers for 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1) imaging. Accumulation of these 
MCHR1 PET-tracers in rat brown adipose tissue (BAT) in vivo provided first 
indication of MCHR1 expression in rodent BAT. To rule out off-target binding, 
affinity of both MCHR1 ligands toward adrenergic beta-3 receptors (ADRB3) was 
examined. Further, specific binding of [11C]SNAP-7941 to brown adipocytes and 
effects of MCHR1 ligands on brown adipocyte activation were investigated. 
SNAP-7941 and FE@SNAP evinced to be highly selective toward MCHR1. 
[11C]SNAP-7941 binding to brown adipocytes was shown to be mainly 
MCHR1-specific. This data strongly indicates MCHR1 expression in rodent BAT and 
moreover, a peripheral, anti-obesity effect of MCHR1 antagonists directly 
exerted in BAT is proposed. Moreover, MCHR1 expression in murine brown 
adipocytes was confirmed by protein and mRNA analysis. We conclude that MCHR1 
PET imaging contributes to basic research in endocrinology by elucidating the 
involvement of the MCH system in peripheral tissues, such as BAT.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2019.00324
PMCID: PMC6581027
PMID: 31244769


380. Front Cell Neurosci. 2019 Jun 12;13:266. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2019.00266. 
eCollection 2019.

Hedgehog Pathway Activation Alters Ciliary Signaling in Primary Hypothalamic 
Cultures.

Bansal R(1), Engle SE(1), Antonellis PJ(1), Whitehouse LS(1), Baucum AJ 
2nd(1)(2), Cummins TR(1)(2), Reiter JF(3), Berbari NF(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Indiana University - Purdue University Indianapolis, 
Indianapolis, IN, United States.
(2)Stark Neurosciences Research Institute, Indianapolis, IN, United States.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Cardiovascular Research Institute, 
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States.
(4)Center for Diabetes and Metabolic Disorders Research, Indiana University 
School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, United States.

Primary cilia dysfunction has been associated with hyperphagia and obesity in 
both ciliopathy patients and mouse models of cilia perturbation. Neurons 
throughout the brain possess these solitary cellular appendages, including in 
the feeding centers of the hypothalamus. Several cell biology questions 
associated with primary neuronal cilia signaling are challenging to address in 
vivo. Here we utilize primary hypothalamic neuronal cultures to study ciliary 
signaling in relevant cell types. Importantly, these cultures contain neuronal 
populations critical for appetite and satiety such as pro-opiomelanocortin 
(POMC) and agouti related peptide (AgRP) expressing neurons and are thus useful 
for studying signaling involved in feeding behavior. Correspondingly, these 
cultured neurons also display electrophysiological activity and respond to both 
local and peripheral signals that act on the hypothalamus to influence feeding 
behaviors, such as leptin and melanin concentrating hormone (MCH). 
Interestingly, we found that cilia mediated hedgehog signaling, generally 
associated with developmental processes, can influence ciliary GPCR signaling 
(Mchr1) in terminally differentiated neurons. Specifically, pharmacological 
activation of the hedgehog-signaling pathway using the smoothened agonist, SAG, 
attenuated the ability of neurons to respond to ligands (MCH) of ciliary GPCRs. 
Understanding how the hedgehog pathway influences cilia GPCR signaling in 
terminally differentiated neurons could reveal the molecular mechanisms 
associated with clinical features of ciliopathies, such as 
hyperphagia-associated obesity.

DOI: 10.3389/fncel.2019.00266
PMCID: PMC6582312
PMID: 31249512


381. Behav Brain Res. 2019 Nov 18;374:112120. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2019.112120.
Epub  2019 Jul 31.

Melanin-concentrating hormone in the Locus Coeruleus aggravates helpless 
behavior in stressed rats.

Urbanavicius J(1), Fabius S(1), Roncalho A(2), Joca S(3), Torterolo P(4), Scorza 
C(5).

Author information:
(1)Departament of Experimental Neuropharmacology, Instituto de Investigaciones 
Biológicas Clemente Estable, Uruguay.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine of Ribeirão Preto, University 
of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil.
(3)Department of Physics and Chemistry, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil.
(4)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, Universidad de la República, 
Montevideo, Uruguay.
(5)Departament of Experimental Neuropharmacology, Instituto de Investigaciones 
Biológicas Clemente Estable, Uruguay. Electronic address: cscorza@iibce.edu.uy.

Animal studies have shown that antagonists of receptor 1 of 
Melanin-Concentrating Hormone (MCH-R1) elicit antidepressive-like behavior, 
suggesting that MCH-R1 might be a novel target for the treatment of depression 
and supports the hypothesis that MCHergic signaling regulates depressive-like 
behaviors. Consistent with the evidence that MCHergic neurons send projections 
to dorsal and median raphe nuclei, we have previously demonstrated that MCH 
microinjections in both nuclei induced a depressive-like behavior. Even though 
MCH neurons also project to Locus Coeruleus (LC), only a few studies have 
reported the behavioral and neurochemical effect of MCH into the LC. We studied 
the effects of MCH (100 and 200 ng) into the LC on coping-stress related 
behaviors associated with depression, using two different behavioral tests: the 
forced swimming test (FST) and the learned helplessness (LH). To characterize 
the functional interaction between MCH and the noradrenergic LC system, we also 
evaluated the neurochemical effects of MCH (100 ng) on the extracellular levels 
of noradrenaline (NA) in the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), an important LC 
terminal region involved in emotional processing. MCH administration into the LC 
elicited a depressive-like behavior evidenced in both paradigms. Interestingly, 
in the LH, MCH (100) elicited a significant increase in escape failures only in 
stressed animals. A significant decrease in prefrontal levels of NA was observed 
after MCH microinjection into the LC. Our results demonstrate that increased MCH 
signaling into the LC triggers depressive-like behaviors, especially in stressed 
animals. These data further corroborate the important role of MCH in the 
neurobiology of depression.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2019.112120
PMID: 31376444 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Trends Pharmacol Sci. 2019 Oct;40(10):790-800. doi:
10.1016/j.tips.2019.08.006.  Epub 2019 Sep 10.

Advances and Challenges in Rational Drug Design for SLCs.

Garibsingh RA(1), Schlessinger A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacological Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount 
Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmacological Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount 
Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA. Electronic address: avner.schlessinger@mssm.edu.

There are over 420 human solute carrier (SLC) transporters from 65 families that 
are expressed ubiquitously in the body. The SLCs mediate the movement of ions, 
drugs, and metabolites across membranes and their dysfunction has been 
associated with a variety of diseases, such as diabetes, cancer, and central 
nervous system (CNS) disorders. Thus, SLCs are emerging as important targets for 
therapeutic intervention. Recent technological advances in experimental and 
computational biology allow better characterization of SLC pharmacology. Here we 
describe recent approaches to modulate SLC transporter function, with an 
emphasis on the use of computational approaches and computer-aided drug design 
(CADD) to study nutrient transporters. Finally, we discuss future perspectives 
in the rational design of SLC drugs.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tips.2019.08.006
PMCID: PMC7082830
PMID: 31519459 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2020 Mar 10;23(1):53-65. doi:
10.1093/ijnp/pyz051.

Melanin Concentrating Hormone Signaling Deficits in Schizophrenia: Association 
With Memory and Social Impairments and Abnormal Sensorimotor Gating.

Vawter MP(1), Schulmann A(1)(2), Alhassen L(1), Alhassen W(3)(4), Hamzeh AR(5), 
Sakr J(4), Pauluk L(3), Yoshimura R(3), Wang X(3), Dai Q(3), Sanathara N(3), 
Civelli O(3)(4)(6), Alachkar A(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, School of Medicine, University 
of California, Irvine, CA.
(2)Janelia Research Campus, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Ashburn, VA.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of California, 
Irvine, CA.
(4)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of California, Irvine, CA.
(5)John Curtin School of Medical Research, Australian National University, 
Canberra.
(6)Department of Developmental and Cell Biology, School of Medicine, University 
of California, Irvine, CA.

BACKGROUND: Evidence from anatomical, pharmacological, and genetic studies 
supports a role for the neuropeptide melanin concentrating hormone system in 
modulating emotional and cognitive functions. Genome-wide association studies 
revealed a potential association between the melanin concentrating hormone 
receptor (MCHR1) gene locus and schizophrenia, and the largest genome-wide 
association study conducted to date shows a credible genome-wide association.
METHODS: We analyzed MCHR1 and pro-melanin concentrating hormone RNA-Seq 
expression in the prefrontal cortex in schizophrenia patients and healthy 
controls. Disruptions in the melanin concentrating hormone system were modeled 
in the mouse brain by germline deletion of MCHR1 and by conditional ablation of 
melanin concentrating hormone expressing neurons using a Cre-inducible 
diphtheria toxin system.
RESULTS: MCHR1 expression is decreased in the prefrontal cortex of schizophrenia 
samples (false discovery rate (FDR) P < .05, CommonMind and PsychEncode combined 
datasets, n = 901) while pro-melanin concentrating hormone is below the 
detection threshold. MCHR1 expression decreased with aging (P = 6.6E-57) in 
human dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. The deletion of MCHR1 was found to lead to 
behavioral abnormalities mimicking schizophrenia-like phenotypes: hyperactivity, 
increased stereotypic and repetitive behavior, social impairment, impaired 
sensorimotor gating, and disrupted cognitive functions. Conditional ablation of 
pro-melanin concentrating hormone neurons increased repetitive behavior and 
produced a deficit in sensorimotor gating.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study indicates that early disruption of the melanin 
concentrating hormone system interferes with neurodevelopmental processes, which 
may contribute to the pathogenesis of schizophrenia. Further neurobiological 
research on the developmental timing and circuits that are affected by melanin 
concentrating hormone may lead to a therapeutic target for early prevention of 
schizophrenia.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of CINP.

DOI: 10.1093/ijnp/pyz051
PMCID: PMC7442395
PMID: 31563948 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Nihon Yakurigaku Zasshi. 2019;154(4):179-185. doi: 10.1254/fpj.154.179.

[Selective signaling pathway via feeding-related ciliary GPCR, 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1].

[Article in Japanese]

Saito Y(1), Hamamoto A(2), Kobayashi Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Integrated Sciences for Life, Hiroshima University.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular Science, Faculty of Engineering, 
Gifu University.

G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), which constitute a highly diverse family of 
seven transmembrane receptors, respond to external signals and regulate a 
variety of cellular and physiological processes. GPCRs are encoded by about 800 
different genes in human and they represent the largest family of drug targets 
in clinical trials, which accounts for about 30% of approved drugs acting on 108 
unique GPCRs. Signaling through GPCRs can be optimized by enriching receptors, 
selective binding partners, and downstream effectors in discrete cellular 
environment. The primary cilium is a ubiquitous organelle that functions as a 
sensory antenna for surrounding physical and chemical stimuli. Primary cilium's 
compartment is as little as 1/10,000th of the total cell volume. Therefore, the 
ciliary membrane is highly enriched for specific signaling molecules, allowing 
the primary cilium to organize signaling in a highly ordered microenvironment. 
Recently, a set of non-olfactory GPCRs such as somatostatin receptor 3 and 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1) have been found to be 
selectively targeted to cilia on several mammalian cell types including neuronal 
cells both in vitro and in vivo approaches. Moreover, investigations into the 
pathophysiology have implicated GPCR ciliary signaling in a number of 
developmental and cellular pathways. Thus, cilia are now considered as an 
increasingly important connection for GPCR signaling. This review summarizes our 
current understanding of the signaling pathways though ciliary GPCR, especially 
feeding- and mood-related GPCR MCHR1, along with specific biological phenomenon 
as cilia length shortening.

DOI: 10.1254/fpj.154.179
PMID: 31597896 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Nat Commun. 2019 Oct 29;10(1):4923. doi: 10.1038/s41467-019-12895-y.

Hypothalamus-hippocampus circuitry regulates impulsivity via 
melanin-concentrating hormone.

Noble EE(1)(2), Wang Z(3), Liu CM(4), Davis EA(1), Suarez AN(1), Stein LM(5), 
Tsan L(4), Terrill SJ(1), Hsu TM(6), Jung AH(4), Raycraft LM(7), Hahn JD(8), 
Darvas M(9), Cortella AM(1), Schier LA(1)(4), Johnson AW(7), Hayes MR(5), 
Holschneider DP(3), Kanoski SE(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Human and Evolutionary Biology Section, Department of Biological Sciences, 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, 90089, USA.
(2)Department of Foods and Nutrition, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, 30606, 
USA.
(3)Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Sciences, University of Southern 
California, Los Angeles, CA, 90089, USA.
(4)Neuroscience Graduate Program, University of Southern California, Los 
Angeles, CA, 90089, USA.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA.
(6)Department of Psychology, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, 
60612, USA.
(7)Department of Psychology and Neuroscience Program, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, MI, 48824, USA.
(8)Neurobiology Section, Department of Biological Sciences, University of 
Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, 90089, USA.
(9)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, 98195, USA.
(10)Human and Evolutionary Biology Section, Department of Biological Sciences, 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, 90089, USA. kanoski@usc.edu.
(11)Neuroscience Graduate Program, University of Southern California, Los 
Angeles, CA, 90089, USA. kanoski@usc.edu.

Behavioral impulsivity is common in various psychiatric and metabolic disorders. 
Here we identify a hypothalamus to telencephalon neural pathway for regulating 
impulsivity involving communication from melanin-concentrating hormone 
(MCH)-expressing lateral hypothalamic neurons to the ventral hippocampus 
subregion (vHP). Results show that both site-specific upregulation 
(pharmacological or chemogenetic) and chronic downregulation (RNA interference) 
of MCH communication to the vHP increases impulsive responding in rats, 
indicating that perturbing this system in either direction elevates impulsivity. 
Furthermore, these effects are not secondary to either impaired timing accuracy, 
altered activity, or increased food motivation, consistent with a specific role 
for vHP MCH signaling in the regulation of impulse control. Results from 
additional functional connectivity and neural pathway tracing analyses implicate 
the nucleus accumbens as a putative downstream target of vHP MCH1 
receptor-expressing neurons. Collectively, these data reveal a specific neural 
circuit that regulates impulsivity and provide evidence of a novel function for 
MCH on behavior.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-019-12895-y
PMCID: PMC6820566
PMID: 31664021 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: M.R.H. has received research support from 
investigator-initiated sponsored proposals from Novo Nordisk, Zealand Pharma, 
and Boehringer-Ingelheim. The other authors declare no competing interests.


386. Mol Metab. 2019 Nov;29:114-123. doi: 10.1016/j.molmet.2019.08.018. Epub 2019
Aug  28.

Conditional deletion of melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 from GABAergic 
neurons increases locomotor activity.

Chee MJ(1), Hebert AJ(2), Briançon N(3), Flaherty SE 3rd(3), Pissios P(3), 
Maratos-Flier E(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada; Division 
of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. Electronic address: 
melissa.chee@carleton.ca.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada; Division 
of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess 
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) plays a key role in regulating 
energy balance. MCH acts via its receptor MCHR1, and MCHR1 deletion increases 
energy expenditure and locomotor activity, which is associated with a 
hyperdopaminergic state. Since MCHR1 expression is widespread, the neurons 
supporting the effects of MCH on energy expenditure are not clearly defined. 
There is a high density of MCHR1 neurons in the striatum, and these neurons are 
known to be GABAergic. We thus determined if MCH acts via this GABAergic 
neurocircuit to mediate energy balance.
METHODS: We generated a Mchr1-flox mouse and crossed it with the Vgat-cre mouse 
to assess if MCHR1 deletion from GABAergic neurons expressing the vesicular GABA 
transporter (vGAT) in female Vgat-Mchr1-KO mice resulted in lower body weights 
or increased energy expenditure. Additionally, we determined if MCHR1-expressing 
neurons within the accumbens form part of the neural circuit underlying 
MCH-mediated energy balance by delivering an adeno-associated virus expressing 
Cre recombinase to the accumbens nucleus of Mchr1-flox mice. To evaluate if a 
dysregulated dopaminergic tone leads to their hyperactivity, we determined if 
the dopamine reuptake blocker GBR12909 prolonged the drug-induced locomotor 
activity in Vgat-Mchr1-KO mice. Furthermore, we also performed amperometry 
recordings to test whether MCHR1 deletion increases dopamine output within the 
accumbens and whether MCH can suppress dopamine release.
RESULTS: Vgat-Mchr1-KO mice have lower body weight, increased energy 
expenditure, and increased locomotor activity. Similarly, restricting MCHR1 
deletion to the accumbens nucleus also increased locomotor activity. 
Vgat-Mchr1-KO mice show increased and prolonged sensitivity to GBR12909-induced 
locomotor activity, and amperometry recordings revealed that GBR12909 elevated 
accumbens dopamine levels to twice that of controls, thus MCHR1 deletion may 
lead to a hyperdopaminergic state that mediates their observed hyperactivity. 
Consistent with the inhibitory effect of MCH, we found that MCH acutely 
suppresses dopamine release within the accumbens.
CONCLUSIONS: As with established models of systemic MCH or MCHR1 deletion, we 
found that MCHR1 deletion from GABAergic neurons, specifically those within the 
accumbens nucleus, also led to increased locomotor activity. A hyperdopaminergic 
state underlies this increased locomotor activity, and is consistent with our 
finding that MCH signaling within the accumbens nucleus suppresses dopamine 
release. In effect, MCHR1 deletion may disinhibit dopamine release leading to 
the observed hyperactivity.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier GmbH.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molmet.2019.08.018
PMCID: PMC6745487
PMID: 31668382 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2019 Dec 15;29(24):126741. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2019.126741. Epub 2019 Oct 16.

Identification of a new small molecule chemotype of Melanin Concentrating 
Hormone Receptor-1 antagonists using pharmacophore-based virtual screening.

Helal MA(1), Chittiboyina AG(2), Avery MA(3).

Author information:
(1)University of Science and Technology, Biomedical Sciences Program, Zewail 
City of Science and Technology, October Gardens, 6th of October, Giza 12578, 
Egypt; Medicinal Chemistry Department, Faculty of Pharmacy, Suez Canal 
University, Ismailia 41522, Egypt. Electronic address: mhelal@zewailcity.edu.eg.
(2)National Center for Natural Products Research, School of Pharmacy, University 
of Mississippi, University, MS 38677, United States.
(3)Department of BioMolecular Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of 
Mississippi, University, MS 38677, United States.

MCH receptor is a G protein-coupled receptor with two subtypes R1 and R2. Many 
studies have demonstrated the role of MCH-R1 in feeding and energy homeostasis. 
It has been proven that oral administration of small molecule MCH-R1 antagonists 
significantly reduces food intake and causes a dose-dependent weight loss. In 
this study, two ligand-based pharmacophores were developed and validated based 
on recently published MCH-R1 antagonists with diverse structures. Successful 
pharmacophores had one hydrogen bond acceptor, one positive ionizable, one ring 
aromatic and two or three hydrophobic groups. These 3D-QSAR models were used for 
virtual screening of the ZINC chemical database resulting in the identification 
of nine compounds with more than 50% displacement of radiolabeled MCH at a 20 μM 
concentration. Moreover, four of these compounds showed antagonistic activities 
in Aequorin functional assay, including MH-3 which is the first MCH-R1 
antagonist based on a diazaspiro[4.5]decane scaffold. The most active compounds 
were also docked into our previously published MCH-R1 homology model to gain 
insights into their binding determinants. These compounds could represent a 
viable starting scaffold for the design of potent MCH-R1 antagonists with 
improved pharmacokinetic properties as an effective treatment for obesity.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2019.126741
PMID: 31678007 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Sci Rep. 2019 Nov 26;9(1):17587. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-54355-z.

DNA methylation changes in infants between 6 and 52 weeks.

Wikenius E(1)(2), Moe V(3)(4), Smith L(3), Heiervang ER(5)(6), Berglund A(7).

Author information:
(1)H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute, Tampa, Florida, USA. 
ellen.wikenius@gmail.com.
(2)Institute of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, 
Oslo, Norway. ellen.wikenius@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Psychology, Faculty of Social Sciences, University of Oslo, 
Oslo, Norway.
(4)The Center for Child and Adolescent Mental Health, Eastern and Southern 
Norway (RBUP), Oslo, Norway.
(5)Institute of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, 
Oslo, Norway.
(6)Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(7)H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute, Tampa, Florida, USA.

Infants undergo extensive developments during their first year of life. Although 
the biological mechanisms involved are not yet fully understood, changes in the 
DNA methylation in mammals are believed to play a key role. This study was 
designed to investigate changes in infant DNA methylation that occurs between 6 
and 52 weeks. A total of 214 infant saliva samples from 6 or 52 weeks were 
assessed using principal component analyses and t-distributed stochastic 
neighbor-embedding algorithms. Between the two time points, there were clear 
differences in DNA methylation. To further investigate these findings, paired 
two-sided student's t-tests were performed. Differently methylated regions were 
defined as at least two consecutive probes that showed significant differences, 
with a q-value < 0.01 and a mean difference > 0.2. After correcting for false 
discovery rates, changes in the DNA methylation levels were found in 42 genes. 
Of these, 36 genes showed increased and six decreased DNA methylation. The 
overall DNA methylation changes indicated decreased gene expression. This was 
surprising because infants undergo such profound developments during their first 
year of life. The results were evaluated by taking into consideration the 
extensive development that occurs during pregnancy. During the first year of 
life, infants have an overall three-fold increase in weight, while the fetus 
develops from a single cell into a viable infant in 9 months, with an 
875-million-fold increase in weight. It is possible that the findings represent 
a biological slowing mechanism in response to extensive fetal development. In 
conclusion, our study provides evidence of DNA methylation changes during the 
first year of life, representing a possible biological slowing mechanism. We 
encourage future studies of DNA methylation changes in infants to replicate the 
findings by using a repeated measures model and less stringent criteria to see 
if the same genes can be found, as well as investigating whether other genes are 
involved in development during this period.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-54355-z
PMCID: PMC6879561
PMID: 31772264 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


389. Front Neurosci. 2019 Nov 26;13:1280. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2019.01280.
eCollection  2019.

The Melanin-Concentrating Hormone (MCH) System: A Tale of Two Peptides.

Diniz GB(1)(2), Bittencourt JC(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Anatomia, Instituto de Ciências Biomedicas, Universidade de 
São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, United 
States.
(3)Nucleo de Neurociencias e Comportamento, Instituto de Psicologia, 
Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

The melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) system is a robust integrator of 
exogenous and endogenous information, modulating arousal and energy balance in 
mammals. Its predominant function in teleosts, however, is to concentrate 
melanin in the scales, contributing to the adaptive color change observed in 
several teleost species. These contrasting functions resulted from a gene 
duplication that occurred after the teleost divergence, which resulted in the 
generation of two MCH-coding genes in this clade, which acquired distinctive 
sequences, distribution, and functions, examined in detail here. We also 
describe the distribution of MCH immunoreactivity and gene expression in a large 
number of species, in an attempt to identify its core elements. While initially 
originated as a periventricular peptide, with an intimate relationship with the 
third ventricle, multiple events of lateral migration occurred during evolution, 
making the ventrolateral and dorsolateral hypothalamus the predominant sites of 
MCH in teleosts and mammals, respectively. Substantial differences between 
species can be identified, likely reflecting differences in habitat and 
behavior. This observation aligns well with the idea that MCH is a major 
integrator of internal and external information, ensuring an appropriate 
response to ensure the organism's homeostasis. New studies on the MCH system in 
species that have not yet been investigated will help us understand more 
precisely how these habitat changes are connected to the hypothalamic 
neurochemical circuits, paving the way to new intervention strategies that may 
be used with pharmacological purposes.

Copyright © 2019 Diniz and Bittencourt.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2019.01280
PMCID: PMC6901935
PMID: 31849590


390. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2020 Jul 1;293:113474. doi:
10.1016/j.ygcen.2020.113474.  Epub 2020 Mar 30.

New perspectives on GPCRs: GPCR heterodimer formation (melanocortin receptor) 
and GPCR on primary cilia (melanin concentrating hormone receptor).

Kobayashi Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Integrated Sciences for Life, Hiroshima University, 1-7-1 
Kagamiyama, Higashi-Hiroshima, Hiroshima 739-8521, Japan. Electronic address: 
ykoba@hiroshima-u.ac.jp.

GPCRs are the largest family of receptors accounting for about 30% of the 
current drug targets. However, it is difficult to fully elucidate the mechanisms 
regulating intracellular GPCR signal regulation. It is thus important to 
consider and investigate GPCRs with respect to endogenous situations. Our group 
has been investigating GPCRs involved in body color (teleost and amphibian) and 
eating (vertebrate). Here, I review two independent GPCR systems (heterodimer 
formation and primary ciliated GPCR) that can be breakthroughs in GPCR research. 
In teleosts, MCRs form heterodimers, which significantly reduce their affinity 
for acetylated ligands. In mammals, MCHR1 is localized in the ciliary membrane 
and shortens the length of the primary cilia through a unique signal from the 
ciliary membrane. Considering these two new GPCR concepts is expected to advance 
the overall view of the GPCR system.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2020.113474
PMID: 32240710 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


391. Front Genet. 2020 Mar 27;11:139. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2020.00139. eCollection 
2020.

Genome-Wide Association Study Identifies Genomic Loci Associated With 
Neurotransmitter Concentration in Cattle.

Chen Q(1), Qu K(2), Ma Z(3), Zhan J(2), Zhang F(1), Shen J(1), Ning Q(1), Jia 
P(1), Zhang J(2), Chen N(1), Chen H(1), Huang B(2), Lei C(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction of Shaanxi 
Province, College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, 
Yangling, China.
(2)Yunnan Academy of Grassland and Animal Science, Kunming, China.
(3)Academy of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Qinghai University, 
Xining, China.

Abnormal neurotransmitter concentration is one of the factors that affect the 
health status, behavioral personality, and welfare level of animals, but the 
genetic basis of the abnormality is still largely unknown. The objective of this 
study is to identify putative genomic loci associated with neurotransmitter 
concentration in cattle. We measured serotonin (5HT), dopamine (DA), cortisol, 
glutamate (Glu), and ACTH concentrations in blood serum using double-antibody 
sandwich ELISA in 30 Brahman cattle and 127 Yunling cattle. Interestingly, we 
found that ACTH concentration was positively correlated with body weight, cannon 
circumference, and hip width (P < 0.05). Genome-wide association study (GWAS) 
was performed with mixed linear models using autosomal SNPs derived from the 
whole-genome sequence. We identified five, five, two, three, and five suggestive 
loci associated with 5HT, DA, cortisol, Glu, and ACTH concentration, 
respectively. These 20 associated loci implicated 18 candidate genes. For Glu 
concentration, the most significant association locus was assigned to MCHR1, a 
G-coupled receptor that could modulate glutamate release. For dopamine 
concentration, a very strong association locus was located in the intron of 
SLC18A2, which is a critical mediator of dopamine dynamics. However, for ACTH 
concentration, a very strong association locus was assigned to HTR1F, a G 
protein-coupled receptor that can influence the release of ACTH. Other candidate 
genes of interest identified for neurotransmitter concentration were PRMT6, 
GADD45A, PCCA, ANGPT1, ACCS, LOC100336971, TNR, GSDMA, CNTN3, CARMIL1, CDKAL1, 
RBFOX1, PCDH15, and LGALS12. Our findings will provide targets for the genetic 
improvement of neurotransmitter-related traits in domestic cattle and basic 
materials for studying the mechanism of neurotransmitter synthesis, release, and 
transport in human and animals.

Copyright © 2020 Chen, Qu, Ma, Zhan, Zhang, Shen, Ning, Jia, Zhang, Chen, Chen, 
Huang and Lei.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2020.00139
PMCID: PMC7119242
PMID: 32292413


392. Mol Inform. 2020 Jun;39(6):e2000020. doi: 10.1002/minf.202000020. Epub 2020
Apr  29.

PyRod Enables Rational Homology Model-based Virtual Screening Against MCHR1.

Schaller D(1), Wolber G(1).

Author information:
(1)Pharmaceutical and Medicinal Chemistry, Freie Universität Berlin, 
Königin-Luise-Strasse 2+4, 14195, Berlin, Germany.

Several encouraging pre-clinical results highlight the melanin-concentrating 
hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1) as promising target for anti-obesity drug 
development. Currently however, experimentally resolved structures of MCHR1 are 
not available, which complicates rational drug design campaigns. In this study, 
we aimed at developing accurate, homologymodel-based 3D pharmacophores against 
MCHR1. We show that traditional approaches involving docking of known active 
small molecules are hindered by the flexibility of binding pocket residues. 
Instead, we derived three-dimensional pharmacophores from molecular dynamics 
simulations by employing our novel open-source software PyRod. In a 
retrospective evaluation, the generated 3D pharmacophores were highly predictive 
returning up to 35 % of active molecules and showing an early enrichment (EF1) 
of up to 27.6. Furthermore, PyRod pharmacophores demonstrate higher sensitivity 
than ligand-based pharmacophores and deliver structural insights, which are key 
to rational lead optimization.

© 2020 The Authors. Published by Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.

DOI: 10.1002/minf.202000020
PMCID: PMC7317519
PMID: 32329245 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.


393. Biochem Soc Trans. 2020 Jun 30;48(3):1227-1241. doi: 10.1042/BST20200290.

Elevator-type mechanisms of membrane transport.

Garaeva AA(1), Slotboom DJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Groningen Biomolecular Sciences and Biotechnology Institute, Membrane 
Enzymology, University of Groningen, The Netherlands.
(2)Zernike Institute for Advanced Materials, University of Groningen, The 
Netherlands.

Membrane transporters are integral membrane proteins that mediate the passage of 
solutes across lipid bilayers. These proteins undergo conformational transitions 
between outward- and inward-facing states, which lead to alternating access of 
the substrate-binding site to the aqueous environment on either side of the 
membrane. Dozens of different transporter families have evolved, providing a 
wide variety of structural solutions to achieve alternating access. A sub-set of 
structurally diverse transporters operate by mechanisms that are collectively 
named 'elevator-type'. These transporters have one common characteristic: they 
contain a distinct protein domain that slides across the membrane as a rigid 
body, and in doing so it 'drags" the transported substrate along. Analysis of 
the global conformational changes that take place in membrane transporters using 
elevator-type mechanisms reveals that elevator-type movements can be achieved in 
more than one way. Molecular dynamics simulations and experimental data help to 
understand how lipid bilayer properties may affect elevator movements and vice 
versa.

© 2020 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1042/BST20200290
PMCID: PMC7329351
PMID: 32369548 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no competing 
interests associated with the manuscript.


394. J Neurosci Res. 2020 Oct;98(10):2045-2071. doi: 10.1002/jnr.24651. Epub 2020
Jun  12.

Ciliary melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1) is widely distributed 
in the murine CNS in a sex-independent manner.

Diniz GB(1)(2), Battagello DS(1), Klein MO(1), Bono BSM(3), Ferreira JGP(1), 
Motta-Teixeira LC(1), Duarte JCG(1), Presse F(4), Nahon JL(4), Adamantidis A(5), 
Chee MJ(3), Sita LV(1), Bittencourt JC(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of Sao 
Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(3)Department of Neuroscience, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(4)Institut de Pharmacologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IPMC), Université Côte 
d'Azur, CNRS, Valbonne, France.
(5)Department of Neurology, Inselspital, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(6)Center for Neuroscience and Behavior, Institute of Psychology, University of 
Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a ubiquitous vertebrate neuropeptide 
predominantly synthesized by neurons of the diencephalon that can act through 
two G protein-coupled receptors, called MCHR1 and MCHR2. The expression of Mchr1 
has been investigated in both rats and mice, but its synthesis remains poorly 
described. After identifying an antibody that detects MCHR1 with high 
specificity, we employed immunohistochemistry to map the distribution of MCHR1 
in the CNS of rats and mice. Multiple neurochemical markers were also employed 
to characterize some of the neuronal populations that synthesize MCHR1. Our 
results show that MCHR1 is abundantly found in a subcellular structure called 
the primary cilium, which has been associated, among other functions, with the 
detection of free neurochemical messengers present in the extracellular space. 
Ciliary MCHR1 was found in a wide range of areas, including the olfactory bulb, 
cortical mantle, striatum, hippocampal formation, amygdala, midline thalamic 
nuclei, periventricular hypothalamic nuclei, midbrain areas, and in the spinal 
cord. No differences were observed between male and female mice, and 
interspecies differences were found in the caudate-putamen nucleus and the 
subgranular zone. Ciliary MCHR1 was found in close association with several 
neurochemical markers, including tyrosine hydroxylase, calretinin, kisspeptin, 
estrogen receptor, oxytocin, vasopressin, and corticotropin-releasing factor. 
Given the role of neuronal primary cilia in sensing free neurochemical 
messengers in the extracellular fluid, the widespread distribution of ciliary 
MCHR1, and the diverse neurochemical populations who synthesize MCHR1, our data 
indicate that nonsynaptic communication plays a prominent role in the normal 
function of the MCH system.

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jnr.24651
PMID: 32530066 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Microscopy (Oxf). 2020 Oct 30;69(5):277-285. doi: 10.1093/jmicro/dfaa035.

Analysis of ciliary status via G-protein-coupled receptors localized on primary 
cilia.

Kobayashi Y(1), Hamamoto A(2), Saito Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Integrated Sciences for Life, Hiroshima University, 1-7-1 
Kagamiyama, Higashi-Hiroshima, Hiroshima 739-8521, Japan.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular Science, Faculty of Engineering, 
Gifu University, 1-1 Yanagido, Gifu, Gifu 502-0857, Japan.

G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) comprise the largest and most diverse cell 
surface receptor family, with more than 800 known GPCRs identified in the human 
genome. Binding of an extracellular cue to a GPCR results in intracellular G 
protein activation, after which a sequence of events, can be amplified and 
optimized by selective binding partners and downstream effectors in spatially 
discrete cellular environments. Because GPCRs are widely expressed in the body, 
they help to regulate an incredible range of physiological processes from 
sensation to growth to hormone responses. Indeed, it is estimated that ∼ 30% of 
all clinically approved drugs act by binding to GPCRs. The primary cilium is a 
sensory organelle composed of a microtubule axoneme that extends from the basal 
body. The ciliary membrane is highly enriched in specific signaling components, 
allowing the primary cilium to efficiently convey signaling cascades in a highly 
ordered microenvironment. Recent data demonstrated that a limited number of 
non-olfactory GPCRs, including somatostatin receptor 3 and melanin-concentrating 
hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1), are selectively localized to cilia on several 
mammalian cell types including neuronal cells. Utilizing cilia-specific cell 
biological and molecular biological approaches, evidence has accumulated to 
support the biological importance of ciliary GPCR signaling followed by cilia 
structural changes. Thus, cilia are now considered a unique sensory platform for 
integration of GPCR signaling toward juxtaposed cytoplasmic structures. Herein, 
we review ciliary GPCRs and focus on a novel role of MCHR1 in ciliary length 
control that will impact ciliary signaling capacity and neuronal function.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of The 
Japanese Society of Microscopy. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jmicro/dfaa035
PMID: 32627821 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Sci Rep. 2020 Aug 12;10(1):13659. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-70484-2.

Construct a circRNA/miRNA/mRNA regulatory network to explore potential 
pathogenesis and therapy options of clear cell renal cell carcinoma.

Bai S(1), Wu Y(2), Yan Y(1), Shao S(1), Zhang J(3), Liu J(3), Hui B(1), Liu 
R(1), Ma H(1), Zhang X(1), Ren J(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiotherapy, Oncology Department, First Affiliated Hospital of 
Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, 710061, Shaanxi Province, China.
(2)Department of Chemotherapy, Oncology Department, First Affiliated Hospital of 
Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, 710061, Shaanxi Province, China.
(3)Medical School, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, 710061, Shaanxi Province, 
China.
(4)Department of Radiotherapy, Oncology Department, First Affiliated Hospital of 
Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, 710061, Shaanxi Province, China. 
869491533@qq.com.

Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) is the most representative subtype of 
renal cancer. CircRNA acts as a kind of ceRNA to play a role in regulating 
microRNA (miRNA) in many cancers. However, the potential pathogenesis role of 
the regulatory network among circRNA/miRNA/mRNA is not clear and has not been 
fully explored. CircRNA expression profile data were obtained from GEO datasets, 
and the differentially expressed circRNAs (DECs) were identified through 
utilizing R package (Limma) firstly. Secondly, miRNAs that were regulated by 
these circRNAs were predicted by using Cancer-specific circRNA database and 
Circular RNA Interactome. Thirdly, some related genes were identified by 
intersecting targeted genes, which was predicted by a web tool (miRWalk) and 
differentially expressed genes, which was obtained from TCGA datasets. Function 
enrichment was analyzed, and a PPI network was constructed by Cytoscape software 
and DAVID web set. Subsequently, ten hub-genes were screened from the network, 
and the overall survival time in patients of ccRCC with abnormal expression of 
these hub-genes were completed by GEPIA web set. In the last, a 
circRNA/miRNA/mRNA regulatory network was constructed, and potential compounds 
and drug which may have the function of anti ccRCC were forecasted by taking 
advantage of CMap and PharmGKB datasets. Six DECs (hsa_circ_0029340, 
hsa_circ_0039238, hsa_circ_0031594, hsa_circ_0084927, hsa_circ_0035442, 
hsa_circ_0025135) were obtained and six miRNAs (miR-1205, miR-657, miR-587, 
miR-637, miR-1278, miR-548p) which are regulated by three circRNAs 
(hsa_circ_0084927, hsa_circ_0035442, hsa_circ_0025135) were also predicted. Then 
497 overlapped genes regulated by these six miRNAs above had been predicted, and 
function enrichment analysis revealed these genes are mainly linked with some 
regulation functions of cancers. Ten hub-genes (PTGER3, ADCY2, APLN, CXCL5, 
GRM4, MCHR1, NPY5R, CXCR4, ACKR3, MTNR1B) have been screened from a PPI network. 
PTGER3, ADCY2, CXCL5, GRM4 and APLN were identified to have a significant effect 
on the overall survival time of patients with ccRCC. Furthermore, one compound 
(josamycin) and four kinds of drugs (capecitabine, hmg-coa reductase inhibitors, 
ace Inhibitors and bevacizumab) were confirmed as potential therapeutic options 
for ccRCC by CMap analysis and pharmacogenomics analysis. This study implies the 
potential pathogenesis of the regulatory network among circRNA/miRNA/mRNA and 
provides some potential therapeutic options for ccRCC.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-70484-2
PMCID: PMC7423896
PMID: 32788609 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


397. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2020 Jul 31;11:463. doi:
10.3389/fendo.2020.00463.  eCollection 2020.

The Rat Mammary Gland as a Novel Site of Expression of Melanin-Concentrating 
Hormone Receptor 1 mRNA and Its Protein Immunoreactivity.

Battagello DS(1)(2), Lorenzon AR(3), Diniz GB(2), Motta-Teixeira LC(4), Klein 
MO(2), Ferreira JGP(2), Arias CM(5), Adamantidis A(6), Sita LV(2), Cipolla-Neto 
J(4), Bevilacqua EMAF(3), Sawchenko PE(5), Bittencourt JC(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Psicologia, Nucleo de Neurociencias e Comportamento, 
Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Instituto de Ciencias Biomedicas, Laboratorio de Neuroanatomia Quimica, 
Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Departmento de Biologia Celular e Do Desenvolvimento, Instituto de Ciencias 
Biomedicas, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(4)Departmento de Fisiologia e Biofisica, Instituto de Ciencias Biomedicas, 
Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(5)Laboratory of Neuronal Structure and Function, The Salk Institute for 
Biological Studies, La Jolla, CA, United States.
(6)Department of Neurology, Inselspital, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.

Lactation is a complex physiological process, depending on orchestrated central 
and peripheral events, including substantial brain plasticity. Among these 
events is a novel expression of pro-melanin-concentrating hormone (Pmch) mRNA in 
the rodent hypothalamus, such as the ventral part of the medial preoptic area 
(vmMPOA). This expression reaches its highest levels around postpartum day 19 
(PPD19), when dams transition from lactation to the weaning period. The 
appearance of this lactation-related Pmch expression occurs simultaneously with 
the presence of one of the Pmch products, melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH), 
in the serum. Given the relevance of the MPOA to maternal physiology and the 
contemporaneity between Pmch expression in this structure and the weaning 
period, we hypothesized that MCH has a role in the termination of lactation, 
acting as a mediator between central and peripheral changes. To test this, we 
investigated the presence of the MCH receptor 1 (MCHR1) and its gene expression 
in the mammary gland of female rats in different stages of the reproductive 
cycle. To that end, in situ hybridization, RT-PCR, RT-qPCR, nucleotide 
sequencing, immunohistochemistry, and Western blotting were employed. Although 
Mchr1 expression was detected in the epidermis and dermis of both diestrus and 
lactating rats, parenchymal expression was exclusively found in the functional 
mammary gland of lactating rats. The expression of Mchr1 mRNA oscillated through 
the lactation period and reached its maximum in PPD19 dams. Presence of MCHR1 
was confirmed with immunohistochemistry with preferential location of MCHR1 
immunoreactive cells in the alveolar secretory cells. As was the case for gene 
expression, the MCHR1 protein levels were significantly higher in PPD19 than in 
other groups. Our data demonstrate the presence of an anatomical basis for the 
participation of MCH peptidergic system on the control of lactation through the 
mammary gland, suggesting that MCH could modulate a prolactation action in early 
postpartum days and the opposite role at the end of the lactation.

Copyright © 2020 Battagello, Lorenzon, Diniz, Motta-Teixeira, Klein, Ferreira, 
Arias, Adamantidis, Sita, Cipolla-Neto, Bevilacqua, Sawchenko and Bittencourt.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2020.00463
PMCID: PMC7411258
PMID: 32849267 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Mol Biol Rep. 2020 Oct;47(10):8273-8278. doi: 10.1007/s11033-020-05806-8.
Epub  2020 Sep 10.

Escitalopram as a modulator of proopiomelanocortin, kisspeptin, Kiss1R and MCHR1 
gene expressions in the male rat brain.

Pałasz A(1), Piwowarczyk-Nowak A(2), Suszka-Świtek A(3), Bogus K(3), Filipczyk 
Ł(3), Vecchia AD(4), Mordecka-Chamera K(3), Menezes IC(5), Worthington JJ(6), 
Krzystanek M(7), Wiaderkiewicz R(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Histology, School of Medical Sciences in Katowice, Medical 
University of Silesia, ul. Medyków 18, 40-752, Katowice, Poland. 
apalasz@sum.edu.pl.
(2)Department of Anatomy, School of Medical Sciences in Katowice, Medical 
University of Silesia, ul. Medyków 18, 40-752, Katowice, Poland.
(3)Department of Histology, School of Medical Sciences in Katowice, Medical 
University of Silesia, ul. Medyków 18, 40-752, Katowice, Poland.
(4)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Section of Psychiatry, 
University of Pisa, 67, Via Roma, 56100, Pisa, Italy.
(5)Department of Neurosciences and Behaviour, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
São Paulo, Av. Bandeirantes 3900, Ribeirao Preto, SP, 14049-900, Brazil.
(6)Division of Biomedical and Life Sciences, Faculty of Health and Medicine, 
Lancaster University, Lancaster, LA1 4YQ, UK.
(7)Department and Clinic of Psychiatric Rehabilitation, School of Medicine in 
Katowice, Medical University of Silesia, ul. Ziolowa 45/47, 40-635, Katowice, 
Poland.

Neuropeptides are important, multifunctional regulatory factors of the nervous 
system, being considered as a novel, atypical sites of antidepressants action. 
It has already been proven that some of them, such as selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitors (SSRI), are able to affect peptidergic pathways in various 
brain regions. Despite these reports, there is so far no reports regarding the 
effect of treatment with SSRIs on brain proopiomelanocortin (POMC), kisspeptin, 
Kiss1R and MCHR1 gene expression. In the current study we examined POMC, 
kisspeptin, Kiss1R and MCHR1 mRNA expression in the selected brain structures 
(hypothalamus, hippocampus, amygdala, striatum, cerebellum and brainstem) of 
rats chronically treated with a 10 mg/kg dose of escitalopram using quantitative 
Real-Time PCR. Long-term treatment with escitalopram led to the upregulation of 
MCHR1 expression in the rat amygdala. Kisspeptin mRNA level was also increased 
in the amygdala, but Kiss1R mRNA expressions were elevated in the hippocampus, 
hypothalamus and cerebellum. POMC mRNA expressions were in turn decreased in the 
hippocampus, amygdala, cerebellum and brainstem. These results may support the 
hypothesis that these neuropeptides may be involved in the site-dependent 
actions of SSRI antidepressants. This is the first report of the effects of 
escitalopram on POMC, kisspeptin, Kiss1R and MCHR1 in animal brain. Our findings 
shed a new light on the pharmacology of SSRIs and may contribute to a better 
understanding of the alternative, neuropeptide-dependent modes of antidepressant 
action.

DOI: 10.1007/s11033-020-05806-8
PMCID: PMC7588374
PMID: 32914264 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.


399. Neurochem Int. 2021 Jan;142:104902. doi: 10.1016/j.neuint.2020.104902. Epub
2020  Nov 13.

Properties of primary cilia in melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1-bearing 
hippocampal neurons in vivo and in vitro.

Kobayashi Y(1), Okada T(1), Miki D(1), Sekino Y(2), Koganezawa N(3), Shirao 
T(4), Diniz GB(5), Saito Y(6).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Integrated Sciences for Life, Hiroshima University, 1-7-1 
Kagamiyama, Higashi-Hiroshima, Hiroshima, 739-8521, Japan.
(2)Endowed Laboratory of Human Cell-Based Drug Discovery, Graduate School of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 
113-0033, Japan.
(3)Department of Neurobiology and Behavior, Graduate School of Medicine, Gunma 
University, 3-39-22 Showa-machi, Maebashi, Gunma, 371-8511, Japan.
(4)Department of Neurobiology and Behavior, Graduate School of Medicine, Gunma 
University, 3-39-22 Showa-machi, Maebashi, Gunma, 371-8511, Japan; AlzMed,Inc., 
UT South Clinical Research Building, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8485, 
Japan.
(5)Department of Neurosurgery, Yale School of Medicine, 310 Cedar St, New Haven, 
CT, 06520, USA.
(6)Graduate School of Integrated Sciences for Life, Hiroshima University, 1-7-1 
Kagamiyama, Higashi-Hiroshima, Hiroshima, 739-8521, Japan. Electronic address: 
yumist@hiroshima-u.ac.jp.

The primary cilium is a solitary organelle that organizes a sensitive signaling 
hub in a highly ordered microenvironment. Cilia are plastic structures, changing 
their length in response to bioactive substances, and ciliary length may be 
regulated to ensure efficient signaling capacity. Mammalian brain neurons 
possess primary cilia that are enriched in a set of G protein-coupled receptors 
(GPCRs), including the feeding-related melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) 
receptor 1 (MCHR1). We previously demonstrated a novel biological phenomenon, 
ciliary MCHR1-mediated cilia length shortening through Gi/o and Akt signaling, 
using a simple cell culture model of human retinal pigmented epithelial RPE1 
cells exogenously expressing MCHR1. In the present study, we characterized the 
properties of endogenous MCHR1-expressing primary cilia in hippocampal neurons 
in rodents. Using cultured dissociated rat hippocampal neurons in vitro, we 
showed that MCH triggered cilia length reduction involved in MCHR1-Gi/o and -Akt 
signaling. In rat hippocampal slice cultures with preservation of the 
cytoarchitecture and cell populations, ciliary MCHR1 was abundantly located in 
the CA1 and CA3 regions, but not in the dentate gyrus. Notably, treatment of 
slice cultures with MCH induced Gi/o- and Akt-dependent cilia shortening in the 
CA1 region without influencing cilia length in the CA3 region. Regarding the in 
vivo mouse brain, we observed higher levels of ciliary MCHR1 in the CA1 and CA3 
regions as well as in slice cultures. In the starved state mice, a marked 
increase in MCH mRNA expression was detected in the lateral hypothalamus. 
Furthermore, MCHR1-positive cilia length in the hippocampal CA1 region was 
significantly shortened in fasted mice compared with fed mice. The present 
findings focused on the hippocampus provide a potential approach to investigate 
how MCHR1-driven cilia shortening regulates neuronal activity and physiological 
function toward feeding and memory tasks.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuint.2020.104902
PMID: 33197527 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Adv Protein Chem Struct Biol. 2021;123:241-273. doi: 
10.1016/bs.apcsb.2020.10.003. Epub 2020 Dec 4.

Network analysis of transcriptomics data for the prediction and prioritization 
of membrane-associated biomarkers for idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) by 
bioinformatics approach.

Mishra S(1), Shah MI(1), Udhaya Kumar S(2), Thirumal Kumar D(2), Gopalakrishnan 
C(2), Al-Subaie AM(3), Magesh R(4), George Priya Doss C(2), Kamaraj B(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Jaypee University of 
Information Technology, Waknaghat, Solan, Himachal Pradesh, India; Navipoint 
Health India Pvt Ltd, Moula-Ali, Hyderabad, Telangana, India.
(2)School of Biosciences and Technology, Vellore Institute of Technology, 
Vellore, Tamil Nadu, India.
(3)Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, College of Applied Medical 
Sciences, Imam Abdulrahman Bin Faisal University, Dammam, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Faculty of Biomedical Sciences, Technology & Research, Department of 
Biotechnology, Sri Ramachandra University, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India.
(5)Department of Neuroscience Technology, College of Applied Medical Sciences in 
Jubail, Imam Abdulrahman Bin Faisal University, Jubail, Saudi Arabia.

Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a rare yet crucial persistent lung 
disorder that actuates scarring of lung tissues, which makes breathing 
difficult. Smoking, environmental pollution, and certain viral infections could 
initiate lung scarring. However, the molecular mechanism involved in IPF remains 
elusive. To develop an efficient therapeutic arsenal against IPF, it is vital to 
understand the pathology and deviations in biochemical pathways that lead to 
disorder. In this study, we availed network analysis and other computational 
pipelines to delineate the prominent membrane proteins as diagnostic biomarkers 
and therapeutic targets for IPF. This study yielded a significant role of 
glycosaminoglycan binding, endothelin, and GABA-B receptor signaling pathway in 
IPF pathogenesis. Furthermore, ADCY8, CRH, FGB, GPR17, MCHR1, NMUR1, and SAA1 
genes were found to be immensely involved with IPF, and the enrichment pathway 
analysis suggests that most of the pathways were corresponding to membrane 
transport and signal transduction functionalities. This analysis could help in 
better understanding the molecular mechanism behind IPF to develop an efficient 
therapeutic target or biomarkers for IPF.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.apcsb.2020.10.003
PMID: 33485486 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2021 Jun;1494(1):70-86. doi: 10.1111/nyas.14563. Epub 2021
Jan  27.

Discovery of melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 in brown adipose tissue.

Philippe C(1)(2), Klebermass EM(1)(2), Balber T(1)(3), Kulterer OC(1)(4), 
Zeilinger M(5), Egger G(3)(6), Dumanic M(1), Herz CT(4), Kiefer FW(4), Scheuba 
C(7), Scherer T(4), Fürnsinn C(4), Vraka C(1), Pallitsch K(8), Spreitzer H(9), 
Wadsak W(1)(10), Viernstein H(2), Hacker M(1), Mitterhauser M(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nuclear Medicine, Department of Biomedical Imaging and 
Image-Guided Therapy, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Technology and Biopharmaceutics, University of 
Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(3)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute Applied Diagnostics, Vienna, Austria.
(4)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine III, Medical 
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(5)Faculty of Engineering, University of Applied Sciences Wiener Neustadt, 
Wiener Neustadt, Austria.
(6)Department of Pathology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(7)Division of General Surgery, Department of Surgery, Medical University of 
Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(8)Institute of Organic Chemistry, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(9)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of Vienna, Vienna, 
Austria.
(10)Center for Biomarker Research in Medicine - CBmed GmbH, Graz, Austria.

Although extensive research on brown adipose tissue (BAT) has stimulated 
optimism in the battle against obesity and diabetes, BAT physiology and organ 
crosstalk are not fully understood. Besides BAT, melanin-concentrating hormone 
(MCH) and its receptor (MCHR1) play an important role in energy homeostasis. 
Because of the link between hypothalamic MCH neurons and sympathetic BAT 
activation via β-adrenoceptors, we investigated the expression and physiological 
role of the MCHR1 in BAT. MCHR1 was detected in rodent and human BAT with 
RT-qPCR and western blot analyses. In vivo imaging in rats used the glucose 
analog [18 F]FDG and the MCHR1-tracer [11 C]SNAP-7941. We found that the 
β3-adrenoceptor (ADRB3) agonist CL316,243 increased [11 C]SNAP-7941 uptake in 
BAT. Additionally, a pharmacological concentration of SNAP-7941-a low-affinity 
ADRB3 ligand-stimulated [18 F]FDG uptake, reflecting BAT activation. In cultured 
human adipocytes, CL316,243 induced MCHR1 expression, further supporting a 
direct interaction between MCHR1 and ADRB3. These findings characterized MCHR1 
expression in rodent and human BAT for the first time, including in vitro and in 
vivo data demonstrating a link between MCHR1 and the β3-adrenergic system. The 
presence of MCHR1 in BAT emphasizes the role of BAT in energy homeostasis and 
may help uncover treatment approaches for obesity.

© 2021 The Authors. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences published by 
Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of New York Academy of Sciences.

DOI: 10.1111/nyas.14563
PMCID: PMC8248337
PMID: 33502798 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


402. Sci Rep. 2021 Mar 1;11(1):4880. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-84138-4.

Transcriptome analysis of ciliary-dependent MCH signaling in differentiating 
3T3-L1 pre-adipocytes.

Cook LB(1), Ophardt HD(2), Shen R(2), Pratt BH(2), Galbier LA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, 217 Lennon Hall, SUNY Brockport, 350 New Campus Drive, 
Brockport, NY, 14420, USA. lcook@brockport.edu.
(2)Department of Biology, 217 Lennon Hall, SUNY Brockport, 350 New Campus Drive, 
Brockport, NY, 14420, USA.

An understanding of adipocyte responsiveness to G-protein-coupled 
receptor-(GPCR) derived signals must take into consideration the role of 
membrane microenvironments; that individual sub-populations of proteins may vary 
significantly across different regions of the cell, and that cell 
differentiation alters those microenvironments. 3T3-L1 pre-adipocytes undergo a 
dramatic phenotypic transformation during differentiation into adipocytes, 
requiring the development of a transient primary cilium. We demonstrate that 
melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) receptor 1, a GPCR that stimulates appetite, 
translocates to the transient primary cilium during early 3T3-L1 cell 
adipogenesis. Furthermore, we used RNA-Seq to investigate whether MCH signaling 
is influenced by its receptor localization and whether MCH can influence the 
transcriptome of early adipocyte development. We found that MCH signaling is 
sensitive to receptor localization to cilia, and this alters the adipogenic 
transcriptional program. Also, novel MCH signaling pathways in 3T3-L1 cells are 
identified, including those for circadian rhythm, the inflammatory response, and 
ciliary biogenesis. The presence of active MCH-signaling pathways in 
pre-adipocytes and the discovery that these pathways intersect with the early 
adipogenic program, among other newly-identified signaling pathways, suggests 
that the use of MCH receptor 1 antagonists for clinical interventions may have 
unintended consequences on adipose tissue development.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-84138-4
PMCID: PMC7921120
PMID: 33649390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author(s) declare(s) the following potential 
conflict of interests regarding the publication of this article: L.B.C. is a 
paid consultant for W.W. Norton & Company; R.S. has an ARK Innovation ETF (ARKK) 
with Illumina as one of its constituents, but does not directly hold stock in 
Illumina; H.D.O. is employed as a contractor by DuPont and owns stock in 
Organovo; B.H.P. and L.A.G. have no competing interests to declare.


403. Molecules. 2021 Feb 27;26(5):1291. doi: 10.3390/molecules26051291.

MCH-R1 Antagonist GPS18169, a Pseudopeptide, Is a Peripheral Anti-Obesity Agent 
in Mice.

Boutin JA(1), Jullian M(2), Frankiewicz L(2), Galibert M(2), Gloanec P(3), Le 
Diguarher T(4), Dupuis P(5), Ko A(6), Ripoll L(1), Bertrand M(4), Pecquery A(5), 
Ferry G(7), Puget K(2).

Author information:
(1)Institut de Recherches Internationales Servier, 92284 Suresnes, France.
(2)Genepep SA, 34430 Saint Jean de Vedas, France.
(3)Institut de Recherches Servier, 92150 Suresnes, France.
(4)Technologie Servier, 45520 Gidy, France.
(5)Eurofins Discovery, 86600 Celle l'Evescault, France.
(6)Eurofins Discovery, New Taipei City 24891, Taiwan.
(7)Institut de Recherches Servier, 78290 Croissy-sur-Seine, France.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a 19 amino acid long peptide found in the 
brain of animals, including fishes, batrachians, and mammals. MCH is implicated 
in appetite and/or energy homeostasis. Antagonists at its receptor (MCH-R1) 
could be major tools (or ultimately drugs) to understand the mechanism of MCH 
action and to fight the obesity syndrome that is a worldwide societal health 
problem. Ever since the deorphanisation of the MCH receptor, we cloned, 
expressed, and characterized the receptor MCH-R1 and started a vast medicinal 
chemistry program aiming at the discovery of such usable compounds. In the 
present final work, we describe GPS18169, a pseudopeptide antagonist at the 
MCH-R1 receptor with an affinity in the nanomolar range and a Ki for its 
antagonistic effect in the 20 picomolar range. Its metabolic stability is rather 
ameliorated compared to its initial parent compound, the antagonist S38151. We 
tested it in an in vivo experiment using high diet mice. GPS18169 was found to 
be active in limiting the accumulation of adipose tissues and, correlatively, we 
observed a normalization of the insulin level in the treated animals, while no 
change in food or water consumption was observed.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules26051291
PMCID: PMC7957705
PMID: 33673598 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


404. J Neurosci. 2021 Apr 28;41(17):3932-3943. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2993-20.2021.  Epub 2021 Mar 19.

The Transition Zone Protein AHI1 Regulates Neuronal Ciliary Trafficking of MCHR1 
and Its Downstream Signaling Pathway.

Hsiao YC(1), Muñoz-Estrada J(1), Tuz K(1), Ferland RJ(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Experimental Therapeutics, Albany Medical 
College, Albany, New York 12208.
(2)Department of Neuroscience and Experimental Therapeutics, Albany Medical 
College, Albany, New York 12208 rferland2@une.edu.
(3)Department of Neurology, Albany Medical College, Albany, New York 12208.

The Abelson-helper integration site 1 (AHI1) gene encodes for a ciliary 
transition zone localizing protein that when mutated causes the human 
ciliopathy, Joubert syndrome. We prepared and examined neuronal cultures derived 
from male and female embryonic Ahi1+/+ and Ahi1-/- mice (littermates) and found 
that the distribution of ciliary melanin-concentrating hormone receptor-1 
(MchR1) was significantly reduced in Ahi1-/- neurons; however, the total and 
surface expression of MchR1 on Ahi1-/- neurons was similar to controls 
(Ahi1+/+). This indicates that a pathway for MchR1 trafficking to the surface 
plasma membrane is intact, but the process of targeting MchR1 into cilia is 
impaired in Ahi1-deficient mouse neurons, indicating a role for Ahi1 in 
localizing MchR1 to the cilium. Mouse Ahi1-/- neurons that fail to accumulate 
MchR1 in the ciliary membrane have significant decreases in two downstream MchR1 
signaling pathways [cAMP and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (Erk)] on MCH 
stimulation. These results suggest that the ciliary localization of MchR1 is 
necessary and critical for MchR1 signaling, with Ahi1 participating in 
regulating MchR1 localization to cilia, and further supporting cilia as critical 
signaling centers in neurons.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT Our work here demonstrates 
that neuronal primary cilia are powerful and focused signaling centers for the 
G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR), melanin-concentrating hormone receptor-1 
(MCHR1), with a role for the ciliary transition zone protein, Abelson-helper 
integration site 1 (AHI1), in mediating ciliary trafficking of MCHR1. Moreover, 
our manuscript further expands the repertoire of cilia functions on neurons, a 
cell type that has not received significant attention in the cilia field. 
Lastly, our work demonstrates the significant influence of ciliary GPCR 
signaling in the overall signaling of neurons.

Copyright © 2021 the authors.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2993-20.2021
PMCID: PMC8084322
PMID: 33741721 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


405. J Chem Neuroanat. 2021 Jul;114:101959. doi: 10.1016/j.jchemneu.2021.101959.
Epub  2021 Apr 10.

In vivo uptake of a fluorescent conjugate of melanin-concentrating hormone in 
the rat brain.

Ruiz-Viroga V(1), Urbanavicius J(2), Torterolo P(1), Lagos P(3).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Fisiología, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de la 
República, Montevideo, Uruguay.
(2)Departamento de Neurofarmacología Experimental, Instituto de Investigaciones 
Biológicas Clemente Estable, Montevideo, Uruguay.
(3)Departamento de Fisiología, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de la 
República, Montevideo, Uruguay. Electronic address: plagos@fmed.edu.uy.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a hypothalamic neuropeptide synthesized 
by posterior hypothalamic and incerto-hypothalamic neurons that project 
throughout the central nervous system. The MCHergic system modulates several 
important functions such as feeding behavior, mood and sleep. MCH exerts its 
biological functions through interaction with the MCHR-1 receptor, the only 
functional receptor present in rodents. The internalization process of MCHR-1 
triggered by MCH binding was described in vitro in non-neuronal heterologous 
systems with over-expression of MCHR-1. Reports of in vivo MCHR-1 
internalization dynamics are scarce, however, this is an important process to 
explore based on the critical functions of the MCHergic system. We had 
previously determined that 60 min after intracerebroventricular (i.c.v.) 
microinjections of MCH conjugated with fluorophore rhodamine (R-MCH), the dorsal 
and median raphe nucleus presented R-MCH positive labeled neurons. In the 
present work, we further studied the in vivo uptake process focusing on the 
distribution and time-dependent pattern of R-MCH positive cells 10, 20 and 
60 min (T10, T20 and T60, respectively) after i.c.v. microinjection of R-MCH. We 
also explored this uptake process to see whether it was receptor- and 
clathrin-dependent and examined the phenotype of R-MCH positive cells and their 
proximity to MCHergic fibers. We found a great number of R-MCH positive cells 
with high fluorescence intensity in the lateral septum, nucleus accumbens and 
hippocampus at T20 and T60 (but not at T10), while a lower number with low 
intensity was observed in the dorsal raphe nucleus. At T20, in rats pre-treated 
with a MCHR-1 antagonist (ATC-0175) or with phenylarsine oxide (PAO), a clathrin 
endocytosis inhibitor, a robust decrease (> 50 %) of R-MCH uptake occurred in 
these structures. The R-MCH positive cells were identified as neurons (NeuN 
positive, GFAP negative) and some MCHergic fibers run in the vicinities of them. 
We concluded that neurons localized at structures that were close to the 
ventricular surfaces could uptake R-MCH in vivo through a receptor-dependent and 
clathrin-mediated process. Our results support volume transmission of MCH 
through the cerebrospinal fluid to reach distant targets. Finally, we propose 
that R-MCH would be an effective tool to study MCH-uptake in vivo.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jchemneu.2021.101959
PMID: 33848617 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Front Physiol. 2021 Mar 30;12:605811. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2021.605811. 
eCollection 2021.

Exploring the Role of Epicardial Adipose Tissue in Coronary Artery Disease From 
the Difference of Gene Expression.

Wang QC(1), Wang ZY(2), Xu Q(3), Li RB(1), Zhang GG(1), Shi RZ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Xiangya Hospital, Central South 
University, Changsha, China.
(2)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, The Second Xiangya Hospital, Central 
South University, Changsha, China.
(3)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Xiangya Hospital, Central South 
University, Changsha, China.

OBJECTIVES: Epicardial adipose tissue (EAT) is closely adjacent to the coronary 
arteries and myocardium, its role as an endocrine organ to affect the 
pathophysiological processes of the coronary arteries and myocardium has been 
increasingly recognized. However, the specific gene expression profiles of EAT 
in coronary artery disease (CAD) has not been well characterized. Our aim was to 
investigate the role of EAT in CAD at the gene level.
METHODS: Here, we compared the histological and gene expression difference of 
EAT between CAD and non-CAD. We investigated the gene expression profiles in the 
EAT of patients with CAD through the high-throughput RNA sequencing. We 
performed bioinformatics analysis such as functional enrichment analysis and 
protein-protein interaction network construction to obtain and verify the hub 
differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in the EAT of CAD.
RESULTS: Our results showed that the size of epicardial adipocytes in the CAD 
group was larger than in the control group. Our findings on the EAT gene 
expression profiles of CAD showed a total of 747 DEGs (fold change >2, p value 
<0.05). The enrichment analysis of DEGs showed that more pro-inflammatory and 
immunological genes and pathways were involved in CAD. Ten hub DEGs (GNG3, 
MCHR1, BDKRB1, MCHR2, CXCL8, CXCR5, CCR8, CCL4L1, TAS2R10, and TAS2R41) were 
identified.
CONCLUSION: Epicardial adipose tissue in CAD shows unique gene expression 
profiles and may act as key regulators in the CAD pathological process.

Copyright © 2021 Wang, Wang, Xu, Li, Zhang and Shi.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2021.605811
PMCID: PMC8042318
PMID: 33859569

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


407. Nat Genet. 2021 Jun;53(6):817-829. doi: 10.1038/s41588-021-00857-4. Epub
2021  May 17.

Genome-wide association study of more than 40,000 bipolar disorder cases 
provides new insights into the underlying biology.

Mullins N(#)(1)(2), Forstner AJ(#)(3)(4)(5), O'Connell KS(6)(7), Coombes B(8), 
Coleman JRI(9)(10), Qiao Z(11), Als TD(12)(13)(14), Bigdeli TB(15)(16), Børte 
S(17)(18)(19), Bryois J(20), Charney AW(21), Drange OK(22)(23), Gandal MJ(24), 
Hagenaars SP(9)(10), Ikeda M(25), Kamitaki N(26)(27), Kim M(24), Krebs K(28), 
Panagiotaropoulou G(29), Schilder BM(30)(31)(32)(33), Sloofman LG(30), Steinberg 
S(34), Trubetskoy V(29), Winsvold BS(19)(35), Won HH(36), Abramova L(37), 
Adorjan K(38)(39), Agerbo E(14)(40)(41), Al Eissa M(42), Albani D(43), 
Alliey-Rodriguez N(44)(45), Anjorin A(46), Antilla V(47), Antoniou A(48), 
Awasthi S(29), Baek JH(49), Bækvad-Hansen M(14)(50), Bass N(42), Bauer M(51), 
Beins EC(3), Bergen SE(20), Birner A(52), Bøcker Pedersen C(14)(40)(41), Bøen 
E(53), Boks MP(54), Bosch R(55)(56)(57)(58), Brum M(59), Brumpton BM(19), 
Brunkhorst-Kanaan N(59), Budde M(38), Bybjerg-Grauholm J(14)(50), Byerley W(60), 
Cairns M(61), Casas M(55)(56)(57)(58), Cervantes P(62), Clarke TK(63), Cruceanu 
C(62)(64), Cuellar-Barboza A(65)(66), Cunningham J(67), Curtis D(68)(69), 
Czerski PM(70), Dale AM(71), Dalkner N(52), David FS(3), Degenhardt F(3)(72), 
Djurovic S(73)(74), Dobbyn AL(30)(21), Douzenis A(48), Elvsåshagen 
T(18)(75)(76), Escott-Price V(77), Ferrier IN(78), Fiorentino A(42), Foroud 
TM(79), Forty L(77), Frank J(80), Frei O(6)(18), Freimer NB(24)(81), Frisén 
L(82), Gade K(38)(83), Garnham J(84), Gelernter J(85)(86)(87), Giørtz Pedersen 
M(14)(40)(41), Gizer IR(88), Gordon SD(89), Gordon-Smith K(90), Greenwood 
TA(91), Grove J(12)(13)(14)(92), Guzman-Parra J(93), Ha K(94), Haraldsson M(95), 
Hautzinger M(96), Heilbronner U(38), Hellgren D(20), Herms S(3)(97)(98), 
Hoffmann P(3)(97)(98), Holmans PA(77), Huckins L(30)(21), Jamain S(99)(100), 
Johnson JS(30)(21), Kalman JL(38)(39)(101), Kamatani Y(102)(103), Kennedy 
JL(104)(105)(106)(107), Kittel-Schneider S(59)(108), Knowles JA(109)(110), 
Kogevinas M(111), Koromina M(112), Kranz TM(59), Kranzler HR(113)(114), Kubo 
M(115), Kupka R(116)(117)(118), Kushner SA(119), Lavebratt C(120)(121), Lawrence 
J(122), Leber M(123), Lee HJ(124), Lee PH(125), Levy SE(126), Lewis C(77), Liao 
C(127)(128), Lucae S(64), Lundberg M(120)(121), MacIntyre DJ(129), Magnusson 
SH(34), Maier W(130), Maihofer A(91), Malaspina D(30)(21), Maratou E(131), 
Martinsson L(82), Mattheisen M(12)(13)(14)(108)(132), McCarroll SA(26)(27), 
McGregor NW(133), McGuffin P(9), McKay JD(134), Medeiros H(110), Medland SE(89), 
Millischer V(120)(121), Montgomery GW(11), Moran JL(26)(135), Morris DW(136), 
Mühleisen TW(4)(97), O'Brien N(42), O'Donovan C(84), Olde Loohuis LM(24)(81), 
Oruc L(137), Papiol S(38)(39), Pardiñas AF(77), Perry A(90), Pfennig A(51), 
Porichi E(48), Potash JB(138), Quested D(139)(140), Raj T(30)(31)(32)(33), 
Rapaport MH(141), DePaulo JR(138), Regeer EJ(142), Rice JP(143), Rivas F(93), 
Rivera M(144)(145), Roth J(108), Roussos P(30)(21)(31), Ruderfer DM(146), 
Sánchez-Mora C(55)(56)(58)(147), Schulte EC(38)(39), Senner F(38)(39), Sharp 
S(42), Shilling PD(91), Sigurdsson E(95)(148), Sirignano L(80), Slaney C(84), 
Smeland OB(6)(7), Smith DJ(149), Sobell JL(150), Søholm Hansen C(14)(50), Soler 
Artigas M(55)(56)(58)(147), Spijker AT(151), Stein DJ(152), Strauss JS(104), 
Świątkowska B(153), Terao C(103), Thorgeirsson TE(34), Toma C(154)(155)(156), 
Tooney P(61), Tsermpini EE(112), Vawter MP(157), Vedder H(158), Walters JTR(77), 
Witt SH(80), Xi S(159), Xu W(160), Yang JMK(77), Young AH(161)(162), Young 
H(30), Zandi PP(138), Zhou H(85)(86), Zillich L(80); HUNT All-In Psychiatry; 
Adolfsson R(163), Agartz I(53)(132)(164), Alda M(84)(165), Alfredsson L(166), 
Babadjanova G(167), Backlund L(120)(121), Baune BT(168)(169)(170), Bellivier 
F(171)(172), Bengesser S(52), Berrettini WH(173), Blackwood DHR(63), Boehnke 
M(174), Børglum AD(14)(175)(176), Breen G(9)(10), Carr VJ(177), Catts S(178), 
Corvin A(179), Craddock N(77), Dannlowski U(168), Dikeos D(180), Esko 
T(27)(28)(181)(182), Etain B(171)(172), Ferentinos P(9)(48), Frye M(66), 
Fullerton JM(154)(155), Gawlik M(108), Gershon ES(44)(183), Goes FS(138), Green 
MJ(154)(177), Grigoroiu-Serbanescu M(184), Hauser J(70), Henskens F(61), Hillert 
J(82), Hong KS(49), Hougaard DM(14)(50), Hultman CM(20), Hveem K(19)(185), Iwata 
N(25), Jablensky AV(186), Jones I(77), Jones LA(90), Kahn RS(21)(54), Kelsoe 
JR(91), Kirov G(77), Landén M(20)(187), Leboyer M(99)(100)(188), Lewis 
CM(9)(10)(189), Li QS(190), Lissowska J(191), Lochner C(192), Loughland C(61), 
Martin NG(89)(193), Mathews CA(194), Mayoral F(93), McElroy SL(195), McIntosh 
AM(129)(196), McMahon FJ(197), Melle I(6)(198), Michie P(61), Milani L(28), 
Mitchell PB(177), Morken G(22)(199), Mors O(14)(200), Mortensen 
PB(12)(14)(40)(41), Mowry B(178), Müller-Myhsok B(64)(201)(202), Myers RM(126), 
Neale BM(26)(47)(181), Nievergelt CM(91)(203), Nordentoft M(14)(204), Nöthen 
MM(3), O'Donovan MC(77), Oedegaard KJ(205)(206), Olsson T(207), Owen MJ(77), 
Paciga SA(208), Pantelis C(209), Pato C(110), Pato MT(110), Patrinos 
GP(112)(210)(211), Perlis RH(212)(213), Posthuma D(214)(215), Ramos-Quiroga 
JA(55)(56)(57)(58), Reif A(59), Reininghaus EZ(52), Ribasés M(55)(56)(58)(147), 
Rietschel M(80), Ripke S(26)(29)(47), Rouleau GA(128)(216), Saito T(25), Schall 
U(61), Schalling M(120)(121), Schofield PR(154)(155), Schulze 
TG(38)(80)(83)(138)(217), Scott LJ(174), Scott RJ(61), Serretti A(218), Shannon 
Weickert C(154)(177)(219), Smoller JW(26)(135)(220), Stefansson H(34), 
Stefansson K(34)(221), Stordal E(222)(223), Streit F(80), Sullivan 
PF(20)(224)(225), Turecki G(226), Vaaler AE(227), Vieta E(228), Vincent JB(104), 
Waldman ID(229), Weickert TW(154)(177)(219), Werge T(14)(230)(231)(232), Wray 
NR(11)(233), Zwart JA(18)(19)(35), Biernacka JM(8)(66), Nurnberger JI(234), 
Cichon S(3)(4)(97)(98), Edenberg HJ(79)(235), Stahl EA(30)(21)(181), McQuillin 
A(42), Di Florio A(77)(225), Ophoff RA(24)(81)(119)(236), Andreassen 
OA(237)(238).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA. niamh.mullins@mssm.edu.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
NY, USA. niamh.mullins@mssm.edu.
(3)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, School of Medicine and 
University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(4)Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-1), Research Centre Jülich, 
Jülich, Germany.
(5)Centre for Human Genetics, University of Marburg, Marburg, Germany.
(6)Division of Mental Health and Addiction, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, 
Norway.
(7)NORMENT, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(8)Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(9)Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry Centre, King's College London, 
London, UK.
(10)NIHR Maudsley BRC, King's College London, London, UK.
(11)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, 
Queensland, Australia.
(12)iSEQ, Center for Integrative Sequencing, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
(13)Department of Biomedicine - Human Genetics, Aarhus University, Aarhus, 
Denmark.
(14)iPSYCH, The Lundbeck Foundation Initiative for Integrative Psychiatric 
Research, Aarhus, Denmark.
(15)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, SUNY Downstate Health 
Sciences University, Brooklyn, NY, USA.
(16)VA NY Harbor Healthcare System, Brooklyn, NY, USA.
(17)Research and Communication Unit for Musculoskeletal Health, Division of 
Clinical Neuroscience, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(18)Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(19)K. G. Jebsen Center for Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Public Health 
and Nursing, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Norwegian University of 
Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway.
(20)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(21)Department of Psychiatry, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
NY, USA.
(22)Department of Mental Health, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, 
Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), Trondheim, Norway.
(23)Department of Østmarka, Division of Mental Health Care, St Olavs Hospital, 
Trondheim University Hospital, Trondheim, Norway.
(24)Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Science, Semel Institute, David 
Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, 
CA, USA.
(25)Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine, Fujita Health University, 
Toyoake, Japan.
(26)Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA, 
USA.
(27)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(28)Estonian Genome Center, Institute of Genomics, University of Tartu, Tartu, 
Estonia.
(29)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Charité - Universitätsmedizin, 
Berlin, Germany.
(30)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(31)Department of Neuroscience, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, NY, USA.
(32)Ronald M. Loeb Center for Alzheimer's Disease, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(33)Estelle and Daniel Maggin Department of Neurology, Icahn School of Medicine 
at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(34)deCODE Genetics/Amgen, Reykjavik, Iceland.
(35)Department of Research, Innovation and Education, Division of Clinical 
Neuroscience, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(36)Samsung Advanced Institute for Health Sciences and Technology (SAIHST), 
Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University, Seoul, South Korea.
(37)Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Mental Health Research Center, Moscow, 
Russian Federation.
(38)Institute of Psychiatric Phenomics and Genomics (IPPG), University Hospital, 
LMU Munich, Munich, Germany.
(39)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Hospital, LMU Munich, 
Munich, Germany.
(40)National Centre for Register-Based Research, Aarhus University, Aarhus, 
Denmark.
(41)Centre for Integrated Register-Based Research, Aarhus University, Aarhus, 
Denmark.
(42)Division of Psychiatry, University College London, London, UK.
(43)Department of Neuroscience, Istituto Di Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri 
IRCCS, Milan, Italy.
(44)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Neuroscience, University of Chicago, 
Chicago, IL, USA.
(45)Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA.
(46)Psychiatry, Berkshire Healthcare NHS Foundation Trust, Bracknell, UK.
(47)Analytic and Translational Genetics Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Boston, MA, USA.
(48)2nd Department of Psychiatry, Attikon General Hospital, National and 
Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece.
(49)Department of Psychiatry, Samsung Medical Center, School of Medicine, 
Sungkyunkwan University, Seoul, South Korea.
(50)Center for Neonatal Screening, Department for Congenital Disorders, Statens 
Serum Institut, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(51)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Hospital Carl Gustav 
Carus, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany.
(52)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapeutic Medicine, Medical University 
of Graz, Graz, Austria.
(53)Department of Psychiatric Research, Diakonhjemmet Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(54)Psychiatry, Brain Center UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(55)Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Biomedical Network Research Centre on Mental 
Health (CIBERSAM), Madrid, Spain.
(56)Department of Psychiatry, Hospital Universitari Vall d´Hebron, Barcelona, 
Spain.
(57)Department of Psychiatry and Forensic Medicine, Universitat Autònoma de 
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(58)Psychiatric Genetics Unit, Group of Psychiatry Mental Health and Addictions, 
Vall d´Hebron Research Institut (VHIR), Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(59)Department of Psychiatry, Psychosomatic Medicine and Psychotherapy, 
University Hospital Frankfurt, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(60)Psychiatry, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(61)University of Newcastle, Newcastle, New South Wales, Australia.
(62)Mood Disorders Program, Department of Psychiatry, McGill University Health 
Center, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(63)Division of Psychiatry, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(64)Department of Translational Research in Psychiatry, Max Planck Institute of 
Psychiatry, Munich, Germany.
(65)Department of Psychiatry, Universidad Autonoma de Nuevo Leon, Monterrey, 
Mexico.
(66)Department of Psychiatry and Psychology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(67)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, 
USA.
(68)Centre for Psychiatry, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK.
(69)UCL Genetics Institute, University College London, London, UK.
(70)Department of Psychiatry, Laboratory of Psychiatric Genetics, Poznan 
University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland.
(71)Center for Multimodal Imaging and Genetics, Departments of Neurosciences, 
Radiology, and Psychiatry, University of California, San Diego, CA, USA.
(72)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and 
Psychotherapy, University Hospital Essen, University of Duisburg-Essen, 
Duisburg, Germany.
(73)Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(74)NORMENT, Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Bergen, 
Norway.
(75)Department of Neurology, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(76)NORMENT, KG Jebsen Centre for Psychosis Research, Oslo University Hospital, 
Oslo, Norway.
(77)Medical Research Council Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, 
Division of Psychological Medicine and Clinical Neurosciences, Cardiff 
University, Cardiff, UK.
(78)Academic Psychiatry, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(79)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University, 
Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(80)Department of Genetic Epidemiology in Psychiatry, Central Institute of 
Mental Health, Medical Faculty Mannheim, Heidelberg University, Mannheim, 
Germany.
(81)Center for Neurobehavioral Genetics, Semel Institute for Neuroscience and 
Human Behavior, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(82)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(83)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Medical Center 
Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.
(84)Department of Psychiatry, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, 
Canada.
(85)Department of Psychiatry, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(86)Veterans Affairs Connecticut Healthcare System, West Haven, CT, USA.
(87)Departments of Genetics and Neuroscience, Yale University School of 
Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(88)Department of Psychological Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, 
USA.
(89)Genetics and Computational Biology, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research 
Institute, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.
(90)Psychological Medicine, University of Worcester, Worcester, UK.
(91)Department of Psychiatry, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, 
USA.
(92)Bioinformatics Research Centre, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
(93)Mental Health Department, University Regional Hospital, Biomedicine 
Institute (IBIMA), Málaga, Spain.
(94)Department of Psychiatry, Seoul National University College of Medicine, 
Seoul, South Korea.
(95)Landspitali University Hospital, Reykjavik, Iceland.
(96)Department of Psychology, Eberhard Karls Universität Tübingen, Tübingen, 
Germany.
(97)Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(98)Institute of Medical Genetics and Pathology, University Hospital Basel, 
Basel, Switzerland.
(99)Neuropsychiatrie Translationnelle, Inserm U955, Créteil, France.
(100)Faculté de Santé, Université Paris Est, Créteil, France.
(101)International Max Planck Research School for Translational Psychiatry 
(IMPRS-TP), Munich, Germany.
(102)Laboratory of Complex Trait Genomics, Department of Computational Biology 
and Medical Sciences, Graduate School of Frontier Sciences, The University of 
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(103)Laboratory for Statistical and Translational Genetics, RIKEN Center for 
Integrative Medical Sciences, Yokohama, Japan.
(104)Campbell Family Mental Health Research Institute, Centre for Addiction and 
Mental Health, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(105)Neurogenetics Section, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada.
(106)Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(107)Institute of Medical Sciences, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.
(108)Department of Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and Psychotherapy, Center of 
Mental Health, University Hospital Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany.
(109)Cell Biology, SUNY Downstate Medical Center College of Medicine, Brooklyn, 
NY, USA.
(110)Institute for Genomic Health, SUNY Downstate Medical Center College of 
Medicine, Brooklyn, NY, USA.
(111)ISGlobal, Barcelona, Spain.
(112)Laboratory of Pharmacogenomics and Individualized Therapy, Department of 
Pharmacy, School of Health Sciences, University of Patras, Patras, Greece.
(113)Mental Illness Research, Education and Clinical Center, Crescenz VAMC, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(114)Center for Studies of Addiction, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School 
of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(115)RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, Yokohama, Japan.
(116)Psychiatry, Altrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(117)Psychiatry, GGZ inGeest, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(118)Psychiatry, VU Medisch Centrum, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(119)Department of Psychiatry, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam, 
Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(120)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(121)Center for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(122)Psychiatry, North East London NHS Foundation Trust, Ilford, UK.
(123)Clinic for Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Hospital Cologne, 
Cologne, Germany.
(124)Department of Psychiatry, Korea University College of Medicine, Seoul, 
South Korea.
(125)Psychiatric and Neurodevelopmental Genetics Unit, Center for Genomic 
Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 
USA.
(126)HudsonAlpha Institute for Biotechnology, Huntsville, AL, USA.
(127)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montréal, Quebec, Canada.
(128)Montreal Neurological Institute and Hospital, McGill University, Montréal, 
Quebec, Canada.
(129)Division of Psychiatry, Centre for Clinical Brain Sciences, The University 
of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(130)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of Bonn, Bonn, 
Germany.
(131)Clinical Biochemistry Laboratory, Attikon General Hospital, Medical School, 
National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece.
(132)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Centre for Psychiatry Research, 
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(133)Systems Genetics Working Group, Department of Genetics, Stellenbosch 
University, Stellenbosch, South Africa.
(134)Genetic Cancer Susceptibility Group, International Agency for Research on 
Cancer, Lyon, France.
(135)Department of Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(136)Centre for Neuroimaging and Cognitive Genomics (NICOG), National University 
of Ireland Galway, Galway, Ireland.
(137)Medical Faculty, School of Science and Technology, University Sarajevo, 
Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina.
(138)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(139)Oxford Health NHS Foundation Trust, Warneford Hospital, Oxford, UK.
(140)Department of Psychiatry, University of Oxford, Warneford Hospital, Oxford, 
UK.
(141)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Emory University School 
of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(142)Outpatient Clinic for Bipolar Disorder, Altrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(143)Department of Psychiatry, Washington University in Saint Louis, Saint 
Louis, MO, USA.
(144)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology II, Faculty of Pharmacy, 
University of Granada, Granada, Spain.
(145)Institute of Neurosciences, Biomedical Research Center (CIBM), University 
of Granada, Granada, Spain.
(146)Medicine, Psychiatry, Biomedical Informatics, Vanderbilt University Medical 
Center, Nashville, TN, USA.
(147)Department of Genetics, Microbiology and Statistics, Faculty of Biology, 
Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(148)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Psychiatry, School of Health Sciences, 
University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland.
(149)Institute of Health and Wellbeing, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK.
(150)Psychiatry and the Behavioral Sciences, University of Southern California, 
Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(151)Mood Disorders, PsyQ, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(152)SAMRC Unit on Risk and Resilience in Mental Disorders, Department of 
Psychiatry and Neuroscience Institute, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South 
Africa.
(153)Department of Environmental Epidemiology, Nofer Institute of Occupational 
Medicine, Lodz, Poland.
(154)Neuroscience Research Australia, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
(155)School of Medical Sciences, University of New South Wales, Sydney, New 
South Wales, Australia.
(156)Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid 
and CSIC, Madrid, Spain.
(157)Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, School of Medicine, University 
of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA.
(158)Psychiatry, Psychiatrisches Zentrum Nordbaden, Wiesloch, Germany.
(159)Computational Sciences Center of Emphasis, Pfizer Global Research and 
Development, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(160)Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada.
(161)Department of Psychological Medicine, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology 
and Neuroscience, King's College London, London, UK.
(162)South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, Bethlem Royal Hospital, 
Beckenham, UK.
(163)Department of Clinical Sciences, Psychiatry, Umeå University Medical 
Faculty, Umeå, Sweden.
(164)NORMENT, KG Jebsen Centre for Psychosis Research, Division of Mental Health 
and Addiction, Institute of Clinical Medicine and Diakonhjemmet Hospital, 
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(165)National Institute of Mental Health, Klecany, Czech Republic.
(166)Institute of Environmental Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(167)Institute of Pulmonology, Russian State Medical University, Moscow, Russian 
Federation.
(168)Department of Psychiatry, University of Münster, Münster, Germany.
(169)Department of Psychiatry, Melbourne Medical School, The University of 
Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(170)The Florey Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health, The University of 
Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.
(171)Université de Paris, INSERM, Optimisation Thérapeutique en 
Neuropsychopharmacologie, UMRS 1144, Paris, France.
(172)APHP Nord, DMU Neurosciences, Département de Psychiatrie et de Médecine 
Addictologique, GHU Saint Louis-Lariboisière-Fernand Widal, Paris, France.
(173)Psychiatry, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(174)Center for Statistical Genetics and Department of Biostatistics, University 
of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(175)Department of Biomedicine and the iSEQ Center, Aarhus University, Aarhus, 
Denmark.
(176)Center for Genomics and Personalized Medicine, CGPM, Aarhus, Denmark.
(177)School of Psychiatry, University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South 
Wales, Australia.
(178)University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.
(179)Neuropsychiatric Genetics Research Group, Department of Psychiatry and 
Trinity Translational Medicine Institute, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, 
Ireland.
(180)1st Department of Psychiatry, Eginition Hospital, National and Kapodistrian 
University of Athens, Athens, Greece.
(181)Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(182)Division of Endocrinology, Children's Hospital Boston, Boston, MA, USA.
(183)Department of Human Genetics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(184)Biometric Psychiatric Genetics Research Unit, Alexandru Obregia Clinical 
Psychiatric Hospital, Bucharest, Romania.
(185)HUNT Research Center, Department of Public Health and Nursing, Faculty of 
Medicine and Health Sciences, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, 
Trondheim, Norway.
(186)University of Western Australia, Nedlands, Western Australia, Australia.
(187)Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology, University of Gothenburg, 
Gothenburg, Sweden.
(188)Department of Psychiatry and Addiction Medicine, Assistance Publique - 
Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France.
(189)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, King's College London, 
London, UK.
(190)Neuroscience Therapeutic Area, Janssen Research and Development, LLC, 
Titusville, NJ, USA.
(191)Cancer Epidemiology and Prevention, M. Sklodowska-Curie National Research 
Institute of Oncology, Warsaw, Poland.
(192)SA MRC Unit on Risk and Resilience in Mental Disorders, Department of 
Psychiatry, Stellenbosch University, Stellenbosch, South Africa.
(193)School of Psychology, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, 
Australia.
(194)Department of Psychiatry and Genetics Institute, University of Florida, 
Gainesville, FL, USA.
(195)Research Institute, Lindner Center of HOPE, Mason, OH, USA.
(196)Centre for Cognitive Ageing and Cognitive Epidemiology, University of 
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(197)Human Genetics Branch, Intramural Research Program, National Institute of 
Mental Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(198)Division of Mental Health and Addiction, University of Oslo, Institute of 
Clinical Medicine, Oslo, Norway.
(199)Psychiatry, St Olavs University Hospital, Trondheim, Norway.
(200)Psychosis Research Unit, Aarhus University Hospital - Psychiatry, Risskov, 
Denmark.
(201)Munich Cluster for Systems Neurology (SyNergy), Munich, Germany.
(202)University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK.
(203)Research/Psychiatry, Veterans Affairs San Diego Healthcare System, San 
Diego, CA, USA.
(204)Mental Health Services in the Capital Region of Denmark, Mental Health 
Center Copenhagen, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(205)Division of Psychiatry, Haukeland Universitetssjukehus, Bergen, Norway.
(206)Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(207)Department of Clinical Neuroscience and Center for Molecular Medicine, 
Karolinska Institutet at Karolinska University Hospital, Solna, Sweden.
(208)Human Genetics and Computational Biomedicine, Pfizer Global Research and 
Development, Groton, CT, USA.
(209)University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(210)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine and Health Sciences, United 
Arab Emirates University, Al-Ain, United Arab Emirates.
(211)Zayed Center of Health Sciences, United Arab Emirates University, Al-Ain, 
United Arab Emirates.
(212)Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(213)Division of Clinical Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, 
USA.
(214)Department of Complex Trait Genetics, Center for Neurogenomics and 
Cognitive Research, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(215)Department of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Vrije Universiteit 
Medical Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(216)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Faculty of Medicine, McGill 
University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(217)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, SUNY Upstate Medical 
University, Syracuse, NY, USA.
(218)Department of Biomedical and NeuroMotor Sciences, University of Bologna, 
Bologna, Italy.
(219)Department of Neuroscience, SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY, 
USA.
(220)Psychiatric and Neurodevelopmental Genetics Unit (PNGU), Massachusetts 
General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(221)Faculty of Medicine, University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland.
(222)Department of Psychiatry, Hospital Namsos, Namsos, Norway.
(223)Department of Neuroscience, Norges Teknisk Naturvitenskapelige Universitet 
Fakultet for Naturvitenskap og Teknologi, Trondheim, Norway.
(224)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel 
Hill, NC, USA.
(225)Department of Psychiatry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 
Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(226)Department of Psychiatry, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(227)Department of Psychiatry, Sankt Olavs Hospital Universitetssykehuset i 
Trondheim, Trondheim, Norway.
(228)Clinical Institute of Neuroscience, Hospital Clinic, University of 
Barcelona, IDIBAPS, CIBERSAM, Barcelona, Spain.
(229)Department of Psychology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(230)Institute of Biological Psychiatry, Mental Health Services, Copenhagen 
University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(231)Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, 
Denmark.
(232)Center for GeoGenetics, GLOBE Institute, University of Copenhagen, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(233)Queensland Brain Institute, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, 
Queensland, Australia.
(234)Psychiatry, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(235)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(236)Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine, University 
of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(237)Division of Mental Health and Addiction, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, 
Norway. ole.andreassen@medisin.uio.no.
(238)NORMENT, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. ole.andreassen@medisin.uio.no.
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurol. 2021 Jul;17(7):394.

Bipolar disorder is a heritable mental illness with complex etiology. We 
performed a genome-wide association study of 41,917 bipolar disorder cases and 
371,549 controls of European ancestry, which identified 64 associated genomic 
loci. Bipolar disorder risk alleles were enriched in genes in synaptic signaling 
pathways and brain-expressed genes, particularly those with high specificity of 
expression in neurons of the prefrontal cortex and hippocampus. Significant 
signal enrichment was found in genes encoding targets of antipsychotics, calcium 
channel blockers, antiepileptics and anesthetics. Integrating expression 
quantitative trait locus data implicated 15 genes robustly linked to bipolar 
disorder via gene expression, encoding druggable targets such as HTR6, MCHR1, 
DCLK3 and FURIN. Analyses of bipolar disorder subtypes indicated high but 
imperfect genetic correlation between bipolar disorder type I and II and 
identified additional associated loci. Together, these results advance our 
understanding of the biological etiology of bipolar disorder, identify novel 
therapeutic leads and prioritize genes for functional follow-up studies.

DOI: 10.1038/s41588-021-00857-4
PMCID: PMC8192451
PMID: 34002096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests T.E. Thorgeirsson, S. 
Steinberg, H. Stefansson and K. Stefansson are employed by deCODE 
Genetics/Amgen. Multiple additional authors work for pharmaceutical or 
biotechnology companies in a manner directly analogous to academic co-authors 
and collaborators. A.H. Young has given paid lectures and advisory boards for 
the following companies with drugs used in affective and related disorders: 
Astrazenaca, Eli Lilly, Lundbeck, Sunovion, Servier, Livanova, Janssen, Allegan, 
Bionomics, Sumitomo Dainippon Pharma. A.H. Young was Lead Investigator for 
Embolden Study (Astra Zeneca), BCI Neuroplasticity study and Aripiprazole Mania 
Study. Also an investigator for Janssen, Lundbeck, Livanova, Compass. J. 
Nurnberger is an investigator for Janssen. P.F. Sullivan reports the following 
potentially competing financial interests: Lundbeck (advisory committee), Pfizer 
(Scientific Advisory Board member), and Roche (grant recipient, speaker 
reimbursement). G. Breen reports consultancy and speaker fees from Eli Lilly and 
Illumina and grant funding from Eli Lilly. M. Landén has received speaker fees 
from Lundbeck. O.A. Andreassen has received speaker fees from Lundbeck. J.Antoni 
Ramos-Quiroga was on the speakers bureau and/or acted as consultant for 
Eli-Lilly, Janssen-Cilag, Novartis, Shire, Lundbeck, Almirall, Braingaze, 
Sincrolab, and Rubió in the last 5 years. He also received travel awards (air 
tickets + hotel) for taking part in psychiatric meetings from Janssen-Cilag, 
Rubió, Shire, and Eli- Lilly. The Department of Psychiatry chaired by him 
received unrestricted educational and research support from the following 
companies in the last 5 years: Eli-Lilly, Lundbeck, Janssen- Cilag, Actelion, 
Shire, Ferrer, Oryzon, Roche, Psious, and Rubió. Dr. E. Vieta has received 
grants and served as consultant, advisor or CME speaker for the following 
entities: AB-Biotics, Abbott, Allergan, Angelini, AstraZeneca, Bristol-Myers 
Squibb, Dainippon Sumitomo Pharma, Farmindustria, Ferrer, Forest Research 
Institute, Gedeon Richter, Glaxo-Smith-Kline, Janssen, Lundbeck, Otsuka, Pfizer, 
Roche, SAGE, Sanofi-Aventis, Servier, Shire, Sunovion, Takeda, the Brain and 
Behaviour Foundation, the Catalan Government (AGAUR and PERIS), the Spanish 
Ministry of Science, Innovation, and Universities (AES and CIBERSAM), the 
Seventh European Framework Programme and Horizon 2020, and the Stanley Medical 
Research Institute. T. Elvsåshagen has received speaker fees from Lundbeck. S. 
Kittel-Schneider received author’s and consultant honoraria from Medice 
Arzneimittel Pütter GmbH and Shire/Takeda. Prof. Serretti is or has been 
consultant/speaker for: Abbott, Abbvie, Angelini, Astra Zeneca, Clinical Data, 
Boheringer, Bristol Myers Squibb, Eli Lilly, GlaxoSmithKline, Innovapharma, 
Italfarmaco, Janssen, Lundbeck, Naurex, Pfizer, Polifarma, Sanofi, Servier. J.R. 
DePaulo has served as an unpaid consultant to Myriad – Neuroscience (formerly 
Assurex Health) in 2017 and 2019 and owns stock in CVS Health. H.R. Kranzler 
serves as an advisory board member for Dicerna Pharmaceuticals, is a member of 
the American Society of Clinical Psychopharmacology’s Alcohol Clinical Trials 
Initiative, which was sponsored in the past three years by AbbVie, Alkermes, 
Amygdala Neurosciences, Arbor Pharmaceuticals, Ethypharm, Indivior, Lilly, 
Lundbeck, Otsuka, and Pfizer. HRK is named as an inventor on PCT patent 
application #15/878,640 entitled: “Genotype-guided dosing of opioid agonists,” 
filed January 24, 2018. ALM and CL are employees of Indivior, Inc. AA was an 
employee of Indivior, Inc. at the time the work was performed. All other authors 
declare no financial interests or potential conflicts of interest.


408. Genesis. 2021 Aug;59(7-8):e23438. doi: 10.1002/dvg.23438. Epub 2021 Jun 14.

An N-terminal fusion allele to study melanin concentrating hormone receptor 1.

Jasso KR(1)(2), Kamba TK(2), Zimmerman AD(1), Bansal R(3), Engle SE(3), Everett 
T(1), Wu CH(1), Kulaga H(4), Reed RR(4), Berbari NF(3), McIntyre JC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Center for Smell and Taste, University of 
Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA.
(2)Graduate Program in Biomedical Sciences, Neuroscience Concentration, 
University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA.
(3)Department of Biology, Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis, 
Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.
(4)Department of Molecular Genetics, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, 
Maryland, USA.

Cilia on neurons play critical roles in both the development and function of the 
central nervous system (CNS). While it remains challenging to elucidate the 
precise roles for neuronal cilia, it is clear that a subset of G-protein-coupled 
receptors (GPCRs) preferentially localize to the cilia membrane. Further, 
ciliary GPCR signaling has been implicated in regulating a variety of behaviors. 
Melanin concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1), is a GPCR expressed centrally 
in rodents known to be enriched in cilia. Here we have used MCHR1 as a model 
ciliary GPCR to develop a strategy to fluorescently tag receptors expressed from 
the endogenous locus in vivo. Using CRISPR/Cas9, we inserted the coding sequence 
of the fluorescent protein mCherry into the N-terminus of Mchr1. Analysis of the 
fusion protein (mCherry MCHR1) revealed its localization to neuronal cilia in 
the CNS, across multiple developmental time points and in various regions of the 
adult brain. Our approach simultaneously produced fortuitous in/dels altering 
the Mchr1 start codon resulting in a new MCHR1 knockout line. Functional studies 
using electrophysiology show a significant alteration of synaptic strength in 
MCHR1 knockout mice. A reduction in strength is also detected in mice homozygous 
for the mCherry insertion, suggesting that while the strategy is useful for 
monitoring the receptor, activity could be altered. However, both lines should 
aid in studies of MCHR1 function and contribute to our understanding of MCHR1 
signaling in the brain. Additionally, this approach could be expanded to aid in 
the study of other ciliary GPCRs.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/dvg.23438
PMCID: PMC8376785
PMID: 34124835 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Postepy Dermatol Alergol. 2021 Jun;38(3):473-479. doi:
10.5114/ada.2020.93272.  Epub 2020 Feb 25.

Comparison of tyrosinase antibody, tyrosinase-related protein-1 and -2 
antibodies, melanin-concentrating hormone receptor antibody levels with 
autologous serum skin test and autologous plasma skin test results in patients 
with vitiligo.

Unal A(1), Ozkol HU(2), Bayram Y(3), Akdeniz N(4).

Author information:
(1)Abdullah Unal Private Dermatology Clinics, Istanbul, Turkey.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine, Yuzuncu Yil University, Van, 
Turkey.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Yuzuncu Yil University, Van, 
Turkey.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine, Medeniyet University, 
Istanbul, Turkey.

INTRODUCTION: Although the exact etiopathogenesis of vitiligo is unknown, the 
autoimmunity hypothesis is much in evidence. The autologous serum skin test 
(ASST) and autologous plasma skin test (APST) are in vivo methods used in the 
diagnosis of some autoimmune diseases, which are easy and inexpensive to 
perform.
AIM: In this study, we investigated whether or not ASST and APST could determine 
autoimmunity in patients with vitiligo.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: In this study, 30 vitiligo patients presenting to the 
dermatology outpatient clinic and 30 healthy volunteers without any known 
autoimmune diseases were included. Antibodies such as tyrosinase, 
tyrosinase-related protein-1 (TYRP1), tyrosinase-related protein-2 (TYRP2) and 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1) antibodies determined to be 
associated with vitiligo were examined. In addition, the association of these 
antibodies with the positivity of ASST and APST, which were suggested to be 
associated with autoimmunity, were examined.
RESULTS: In our study, tyrosinase antibody was found to be significantly higher 
in vitiligo patients. ASST was positive in 12 (40%) patients with vitiligo and 8 
(26.6%) control subjects. APST was positive in 8 (26.6%) of the patients with 
vitiligo and in 2 (6.6%) of the controls, and there was a significant difference 
between the groups in terms of APST positivity (p = 0.032). In addition, in our 
study, a significant correlation was found between TYRP1 antibody positivity and 
APST positivity in the patient group (p = 0.005).
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that we may use APST to investigate the 
autoimmune etiopathogenesis of vitiligo.

Copyright: © 2020 Termedia Sp. z o. o.

DOI: 10.5114/ada.2020.93272
PMCID: PMC8330856
PMID: 34377130

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


410. FASEB Bioadv. 2021 Jul 5;3(9):744-767. doi: 10.1096/fba.2021-00029.
eCollection  2021 Sep.

Ciliary GPCR-based transcriptome as a key regulator of cilia length control.

Kobayashi Y(1), Tomoshige S(1), Imakado K(1), Sekino Y(2), Koganezawa N(3), 
Shirao T(3)(4), Diniz GB(5), Miyamoto T(6), Saito Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Integrated Sciences for Life Hiroshima University 
Hiroshima Japan.
(2)Endowed Laboratory of Human Cell-Based Drug Discovery Graduate School of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences The University of Tokyo Tokyo Japan.
(3)Department of Neurobiology and Behavior Graduate School of Medicine Gunma 
University Maebashi Japan.
(4)AlzMed, Inc. Tokyo Japan.
(5)California National Primate Research Center University of California Davis CA 
USA.
(6)Department of Genetics and Cell Biology Research Institute for Radiation 
Biology and Medicine Hiroshima University Hiroshima Japan.

The primary cilium is a plasma membrane-protruding sensory organelle that 
efficiently conveys signaling cascades in a highly ordered microenvironment. Its 
signaling is mediated, in part, by a limited set of GPCRs preferentially 
enriched in the cilium membrane. This includes melanin-concentrating hormone 
(MCH) receptor 1 (MCHR1), which plays a role in feeding and mood. In addition to 
its receptor composition, the length of the cilium is a characteristic parameter 
that is implicated in its function. We previously found that MCH can dynamically 
shorten cilia length via the Gi/o and Akt pathways in both MCHR1-expressing 
hTERT-RPE1 cells (hRPE1 cells) and rat hippocampal neurons. However, the 
detailed mechanisms by which MCH regulates cilia length through ciliary MCHR1 
remains unclear. In this study, we aimed to determine the transcriptome changes 
in MCHR1-expressing hRPE1 cells in response to MCH to identify the target 
molecules involved in cilia length regulation via MCHR1 activation. RNA 
sequencing analysis of ciliated cells subjected to MCH treatment showed 
upregulation of 424 genes and downregulation of 112 genes compared with static 
control cells. Validation by quantitative real-time PCR, knocking down, and 
CRISPR/Cas9-mediated knockout technology identified a molecule, PDZ and LIM 
domain-containing protein 5 (PDLIM5). Thus, it was considered as the most 
significant key factor for MCHR1-mediated shortening of cilia length. Additional 
analyses revealed that the actin-binding protein alpha-actinin 1/4 is a crucial 
downstream target of the PDLIM5 signaling pathway that exerts an effect on 
MCHR1-induced cilia shortening. In the endogenous MCHR1-expressing hippocampus, 
transcriptional upregulation of PDLIM5 and actinin 1/4, following the 
application of MCH, was detected when the MCHR1-positive cilia were shortened. 
Together, our transcriptome study based on ciliary MCHR1 function uncovered a 
novel and important regulatory step underlying cilia length control. These 
results will potentially serve as a basis for understanding the mechanism 
underlying the development of obesity and mood disorders.

© 2021 The Authors. FASEB BioAdvances published by The Federation of American 
Societies for Experimental Biology.

DOI: 10.1096/fba.2021-00029
PMCID: PMC8409570
PMID: 34485842

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations of interest: T. Shirao is CEO of 
AlzMed, Inc. No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article for Y. 
Kobayashi, S. Tomoshige, K. Imakado, Y. Sekino, N. Koganezawa, T. Miyamoto, and 
Y. Saito was reported.


411. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2021 Dec;17(12):745-755. doi:
10.1038/s41574-021-00559-1.  Epub 2021 Oct 4.

Multifaceted actions of melanin-concentrating hormone on mammalian energy 
homeostasis.

Al-Massadi O(1)(2), Dieguez C(3)(4), Schneeberger M(5), López M(3)(4), 
Schwaninger M(6), Prevot V(7), Nogueiras R(8)(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria de Santiago de Compostela, Complexo 
Hospitalario Universitario de Santiago (CHUS/SERGAS), Santiago de Compostela, 
Spain. omar.al-massadi.iglesias@sergas.es.
(2)CIBER Fisiopatologia de la Obesidad y Nutrición (CIBERobn), Santiago de 
Compostela, Spain. omar.al-massadi.iglesias@sergas.es.
(3)CIBER Fisiopatologia de la Obesidad y Nutrición (CIBERobn), Santiago de 
Compostela, Spain.
(4)Department of Physiology, CIMUS, University of Santiago de 
Compostela-Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria, Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
(5)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The 
Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA.
(6)Institute for Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, 
University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany.
(7)Univ. Lille, Inserm, CHU Lille, Lille Neuroscience and Cognition, Laboratory 
of Development and Plasticity of the Neuroendocrine Brain, UMR-S1172, EGID, 
Lille, France.
(8)CIBER Fisiopatologia de la Obesidad y Nutrición (CIBERobn), Santiago de 
Compostela, Spain. ruben.nogueiras@usc.es.
(9)Department of Physiology, CIMUS, University of Santiago de 
Compostela-Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria, Santiago de Compostela, Spain. 
ruben.nogueiras@usc.es.
(10)Galician Agency of Innovation (GAIN), Xunta de Galicia, Santiago de 
Compostela, Spain. ruben.nogueiras@usc.es.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2022 Jul;18(7):450.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a small cyclic peptide expressed in all 
mammals, mainly in the hypothalamus. MCH acts as a robust integrator of several 
physiological functions and has crucial roles in the regulation of sleep-wake 
rhythms, feeding behaviour and metabolism. MCH signalling has a very broad 
endocrine context and is involved in physiological functions and emotional 
states associated with metabolism, such as reproduction, anxiety, depression, 
sleep and circadian rhythms. MCH mediates its functions through two receptors 
(MCHR1 and MCHR2), of which only MCHR1 is common to all mammals. Owing to the 
wide variety of MCH downstream signalling pathways, MCHR1 agonists and 
antagonists have great potential as tools for the directed management of energy 
balance disorders and associated metabolic complications, and translational 
strategies using these compounds hold promise for the development of novel 
treatments for obesity. This Review provides an overview of the numerous roles 
of MCH in energy and glucose homeostasis, as well as in regulation of the 
mesolimbic dopaminergic circuits that encode the hedonic component of food 
intake.

© 2021. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41574-021-00559-1
PMID: 34608277 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Mol Neurobiol. 2022 Jan;59(1):245-265. doi: 10.1007/s12035-021-02511-w. Epub
 2021 Oct 19.

Regulation of Brain Primary Cilia Length by MCH Signaling: Evidence from 
Pharmacological, Genetic, Optogenetic, and Chemogenic Manipulations.

Alhassen W(1), Kobayashi Y(2), Su J(1), Robbins B(1), Nguyen H(1), Myint T(1), 
Yu M(1), Nauli SM(3), Saito Y(2), Alachkar A(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of 
California, Irvine, CA, 92697, USA.
(2)Graduate School of Integrated Sciences for Life, Hiroshima University, 1-7-1 
Kagamiyama, Higashi-Hiroshima, Hiroshima, 739-8521, Japan.
(3)Department of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, 
Chapman University, Health Science Campus, Chapman University, Irvine, CA, 
92618, USA.
(4)Departments of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of 
California, Irvine, CA, 92697, USA. aalachka@uci.edu.
(5)Institute for Genomics and Bioinformatics, School of Information and Computer 
Sciences, University of California, Irvine, CA, 92697, USA. aalachka@uci.edu.

The melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) system is involved in numerous 
functions, including energy homeostasis, food intake, sleep, stress, mood, 
aggression, reward, maternal behavior, social behavior, and cognition. In 
rodents, MCH acts on MCHR1, a G protein-coupled receptor, which is widely 
expressed in the brain and abundantly localized to neuronal primary cilia. Cilia 
act as cells' antennas and play crucial roles in cell signaling to detect and 
transduce external stimuli to regulate cell differentiation and migration. Cilia 
are highly dynamic in terms of their length and morphology; however, it is not 
known if cilia length is causally regulated by MCH system activation in vivo. In 
the current work, we examined the effects of activation and inactivation of MCH 
system on cilia lengths by using different experimental models and 
methodologies, including organotypic brain slice cultures from rat prefrontal 
cortex (PFC) and caudate-putamen (CPu), in vivo pharmacological (MCHR1 agonist 
and antagonist GW803430), germline and conditional genetic deletion of MCHR1 and 
MCH, optogenetic, and chemogenetic (designer receptors exclusively activated by 
designer drugs (DREADD)) approaches. We found that stimulation of MCH system 
either directly through MCHR1 activation or indirectly through optogenetic and 
chemogenetic-mediated excitation of MCH-neuron, caused cilia shortening, 
detected by the quantification of the presence of ADCY3 protein, a known primary 
cilia marker. In contrast, inactivation of MCH signaling through pharmacological 
MCHR1 blockade or through genetic manipulations - germline deletion of MCHR1 and 
conditional ablation of MCH neurons - induced cilia lengthening. Our study is 
the first to uncover the causal effects of the MCH system in the regulation of 
the length of brain neuronal primary cilia. These findings place MCH system at a 
unique position in the ciliary signaling in physiological and pathological 
conditions and implicate MCHR1 present at primary cilia as a potential 
therapeutic target for the treatment of pathological conditions characterized by 
impaired primary cilia function associated with the modification of its length.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12035-021-02511-w
PMCID: PMC9083846
PMID: 34665407 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Nov 22;22(22):12609. doi: 10.3390/ijms222212609.

Identification of Impacted Pathways and Transcriptomic Markers as Potential 
Mediators of Pulmonary Fibrosis in Transgenic Mice Expressing Human IGFBP5.

Nguyen XX(1), Renaud L(1), Feghali-Bostwick C(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology & Immunology, Department of Medicine, Medical 
University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425, USA.

Pulmonary fibrosis is a serious disease characterized by extracellular matrix 
(ECM) component overproduction and remodeling. Insulin-like growth 
factor-binding protein 5 (IGFBP5) is a conserved member of the IGFBP family of 
proteins that is overexpressed in fibrotic tissues and promotes fibrosis. We 
used RNA sequencing (RNAseq) to identify differentially expressed genes (DEGs) 
between primary lung fibroblasts (pFBs) of homozygous (HOMO) transgenic mice 
expressing human IGFBP5 (hIGFBP5) and wild type mice (WT). The results of the 
differential expression analysis showed 2819 DEGs in hIGFBP5 pFBs. Functional 
enrichment analysis confirmed the pro-fibrotic character of IGFBP5 and revealed 
its impact on fundamental signaling pathways, including cytokine-cytokine 
receptor interaction, focal adhesion, AGE-RAGE signaling, calcium signaling, and 
neuroactive ligand-receptor interactions, to name a few. Noticeably, 7% of the 
DEGs in hIGFBP5-expressing pFBs are receptors and integrins. Furthermore, hub 
gene analysis revealed 12 hub genes including Fpr1, Bdkrb2, Mchr1, Nmur1, Cnr2, 
P2ry14, and Ptger3. Validation assays were performed to complement the RNAseq 
data. They confirmed significant differences in the levels of the corresponding 
proteins in cultured pFBs. Our study provides new insights into the molecular 
mechanism(s) of IGFBP5-associated pulmonary fibrosis through possible receptor 
interactions that drive fibrosis and tissue remodeling.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222212609
PMCID: PMC8619832
PMID: 34830489 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors state that they have no conflict of 
interest.


414. Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 29;12:745308. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.745308. 
eCollection 2021.

PDGF Promotes Dermal Fibroblast Activation via a Novel Mechanism Mediated by 
Signaling Through MCHR1.

Takamura N(1), Renaud L(1), da Silveira WA(2), Feghali-Bostwick C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC, 
United States.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, School of Life Sciences and Education, 
Staffordshire University, Stoke-on-Trent, United Kingdom.

Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is an autoimmune disease characterized by vasculopathy 
and excessive fibrosis of the skin and internal organs. To this day, no 
effective treatments to prevent the progression of fibrosis exist, and SSc 
patients have disabilities and reduced life expectancy. The need to better 
understand pathways that drive SSc and to find therapeutic targets is urgent. 
RNA sequencing data from SSc dermal fibroblasts suggested that 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1), one of the G protein-coupled 
receptors regulating emotion and energy metabolism, is abnormally deregulated in 
SSc. Platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)-BB stimulation upregulated MCHR1 mRNA 
and protein levels in normal human dermal fibroblasts (NHDF), and MCHR1 
silencing prevented the PDGF-BB-induced expression of the profibrotic factors 
transforming growth factor beta 1 (TGFβ1) and connective tissue growth factor 
(CTGF). PDGF-BB bound MCHR1 in membrane fractions of NHDF, and the binding was 
confirmed using surface plasmon resonance (SPR). MCHR1 inhibition blocked 
PDGF-BB modulation of intracellular cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP). MCHR1 
silencing in NHDF reduced PDGF-BB signaling. In summary, MCHR1 promoted the 
fibrotic response in NHDF through modulation of TGFβ1 and CTGF production, 
intracellular cAMP levels, and PDGF-BB-induced signaling pathways, suggesting 
that MCHR1 plays an important role in mediating the response to PDGF-BB and in 
the pathogenesis of SSc. Inhibition of MCHR1 should be considered as a novel 
therapeutic strategy in SSc-associated fibrosis.

Copyright © 2021 Takamura, Renaud, da Silveira and Feghali-Bostwick.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.745308
PMCID: PMC8667318
PMID: 34912333 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


415. ChemMedChem. 2022 Apr 5;17(7):e202100707. doi: 10.1002/cmdc.202100707. Epub
2022  Feb 3.

hERG Optimization of Benzofuro-Pyridine and Pyrazino-Indole Derivatives as MCHR1 
Antagonists.

Huszár J(1), Bozó É(1), Beke G(1), Katalin Szalai K(2), Kardos P(2), Boros A(2), 
Greiner I(3), Éles J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Gedeon Richter Plc., Gyömrői út 19-21, 1103, 
Budapest, Hungary.
(2)Pharmacological and Drug Safety Research, Gedeon Richter Plc., Gyömrői út 
19-21, 1103, Budapest, Hungary.
(3)Research Directorate, Gedeon Richter Plc., Gyömrői út 19-21, 1103, Budapest, 
Hungary.

Obesity is a global epidemic associated with multiple severe diseases. Several 
pharmacotherapies have been investigated including the antagonists of melanin 
concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1). The design, synthesis, and biological 
studies of novel MCHR1 antagonists based on benzofuro-pyridine and 
pyrazino-indole scaffold was performed. We confirmed that fine-tuning 
lipophilicity and basic pKa by modifying the benzyl group and introducing 
different substituents on the aliphatic nitrogen sidechain decreases both hERG 
inhibition and metabolic clearance. We have succeeded to develop excellent 
in vitro parameters in the case of compounds 17 
(4-[(5-chloropyridin-2-yl)methoxy]-1-[4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-8-oxa-4-azatricyclo[7.4.0.02 
,7 ]trideca-1(13),2(7),9,11-tetraen-11-yl]-1,2-dihydropyridin-2-one 
monohydrochloride) and 23 g 
(4-[(5-chloropyridin-2-yl)methoxy]-1-(1,2,3,4-tetrahydropyrazino[1,2-a]indol-8-yl)pyridin-2(1H)-one 
monohydrochloride), which can be considered as valuable tools for further 
pharmacological investigation.

© 2022 Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/cmdc.202100707
PMID: 35041296 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Sleep Sci. 2021 Jul-Sep;14(3):229-235. doi: 10.5935/1984-0063.20200075.

Microinjection of melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) into the median raphe 
nucleus promotes REM sleep in rats.

Pascovich C(1), Niño S(1), Mondino A(1), Lopez-Hill X(2), Urbanavicius J(2), 
Monti J(3), Lagos P(1), Torterolo P(1).

Author information:
(1)Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de la República, Fisiología, Montevideo - 
Uruguay.
(2)Instituto de Investigaciones Biológicas Clemente Estable, Neurofarmacología 
Experimental, Montevideo - Uruguay.
(3)Hospital de Clínicas, Farmacología y Terapéutica, Montevideo - Uruguay.

Melanin concentrating hormone (MCH) is a sleep-promoting neuromodulator 
synthesized by neurons located in the postero-lateral hypothalamus and 
incerto-hypothalamic area. MCHergic neurons have widespread projections 
including the serotonergic dorsal (DR) and median (MnR) raphe nuclei, both 
involved in the control of wakefulness and sleep. In the present study, we 
explored in rats the presence of the MCH receptor type 1 (MCHR-1) in 
serotonergic neurons of the MnR by double immunofluorescence. Additionally, we 
analyzed the effect on sleep of MCH microinjections into the MnR. We found that 
MCHR-1 protein was present in MnR serotonergic and non-serotonergic neurons. In 
this respect, the receptor was localized in the primary cilia of these neurons. 
Compared with saline, microinjections of MCH into the MnR induced a dose-related 
increase in REM sleep time, which was related to a rise in the number of REM 
sleep episodes, associated with a reduction in the time spent in W. No 
signiﬁcant changes were observed in non-REM (NREM) sleep time. Our data strongly 
suggest that MCH projections towards the MnR, acting through the MCHR-1 located 
in the primary cilia, promote REM sleep.

DOI: 10.5935/1984-0063.20200075
PMCID: PMC8848522
PMID: 35186201


417. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2022 Mar 4;13:848728. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2022.848728. eCollection 2022.

Determination of the Interaction and Pharmacological Modulation of MCHR1 
Signaling by the C-Terminus of MRAP2 Protein.

Wang M(1), Zhai Y(2), Lei X(2), Xu J(2), Jiang B(2), Kuang Z(2), Zhang C(1), Liu 
S(3), Bian S(4), Yang XM(4), Zan T(1), Jin LN(3), Li Q(1), Zhang C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Shanghai Institute of 
Precision Medicine, Shanghai Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(2)Fundamental Research Center, Shanghai Yangzhi Rehabilitation Hospital 
(Shanghai Sunshine Rehabilitation Center), School of Life Sciences and 
Technology, Tongji University, Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Hematology, Changzheng Hospital, Naval Medical University, 
Shanghai, China.
(4)Institute for Regenerative Medicine, Shanghai East Hospital, School of Life 
Sciences and Technology, Tongji University, Shanghai, China.

Melanin concentrating hormone (MCH), an orexigenic neuropeptide, is primarily 
secreted by the hypothalamus and acts on its receptor, the melanin-concentrating 
hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1), to regulate appetite and energy homeostasis. The 
Melanocortin Receptor Accessory Protein 2 (MRAP2), a small single transmembrane 
protein broadly expressed in multiple tissues, has been defined as a vital 
endocrine modulator of five melanocortin receptors (MC1R-MC5R) and several other 
GPCRs in the regulation of central neuronal activities and peripheral energy 
balance. Here, we demonstrated the interaction between MRAP2 and MCHR1 by 
immunoprecipitation and bimolecular fluorescent assay and found that MRAP2 could 
inhibit MCHR1 signaling in vitro. A series of functional truncations of 
different regions further identified that the C-terminal domains of MRAP2 
protein were required for the pharmacological modulation of intracellular Ca2+ 
coupled cascades and membrane transport. These findings elucidated the broad 
regulatory profile of MRAP2 protein in the central nervous system and may 
provide implications for the modulation of central MCHR1 function in vivo.

Copyright © 2022 Wang, Zhai, Lei, Xu, Jiang, Kuang, Zhang, Liu, Bian, Yang, Zan, 
Jin, Li and Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2022.848728
PMCID: PMC8931191
PMID: 35311242 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


418. Biomedicines. 2022 Feb 28;10(3):561. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines10030561.

The Epigenetics of Psychosis: A Structured Review with Representative Loci.

Miller CL(1).

Author information:
(1)MillerBio, Baltimore, MD 21239, USA.

The evidence for an environmental component in chronic psychotic disorders is 
strong and research on the epigenetic manifestations of these environmental 
impacts has commenced in earnest. In reviewing this research, the focus is on 
three genes as models for differential methylation, MCHR1, AKT1 and TDO2, each 
of which have been investigated for genetic association with psychotic 
disorders. Environmental factors associated with psychotic disorders, and which 
interact with these model genes, are explored in depth. The location of 
transcription factor motifs relative to key methylation sites is evaluated for 
predicted gene expression results, and for other sites, evidence is presented 
for methylation directing alternative splicing. Experimental results from key 
studies show differential methylation: for MCHR1, in psychosis cases versus 
controls; for AKT1, as a pre-existing methylation pattern influencing brain 
activation following acute administration of a psychosis-eliciting environmental 
stimulus; and for TDO2, in a pattern associated with a developmental factor of 
risk for psychosis, in all cases the predicted expression impact being highly 
dependent on location. Methylation induced by smoking, a confounding variable, 
exhibits an intriguing pattern for all three genes. Finally, how differential 
methylation meshes with Darwinian principles is examined, in particular as it 
relates to the "flexible stem" theory of evolution.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines10030561
PMCID: PMC8945330
PMID: 35327363

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no conflict of interest.


419. Mol Psychiatry. 2022 Jul;27(7):2927-2939. doi: 10.1038/s41380-022-01523-9.
Epub  2022 Mar 29.

Phenotypes, mechanisms and therapeutics: insights from bipolar disorder GWAS 
findings.

Li M(1)(2)(3), Li T(4)(5), Xiao X(6), Chen J(7), Hu Z(8)(9)(10)(11)(12)(13)(14), 
Fang Y(15)(16).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Models and Human Disease Mechanisms of the Chinese 
Academy of Sciences and Yunnan Province, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan, China. limingkiz@mail.kiz.ac.cn.
(2)Affiliated Mental Health Center & Hangzhou Seventh People's Hospital, 
Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. 
limingkiz@mail.kiz.ac.cn.
(3)KIZ-CUHK Joint Laboratory of Bioresources and Molecular Research in Common 
Diseases, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, 
Yunnan, China. limingkiz@mail.kiz.ac.cn.
(4)Affiliated Mental Health Center & Hangzhou Seventh People's Hospital, 
Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. 
litaozjusc@zju.edu.cn.
(5)Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Greater Bay Area Center for Brain Science and 
Brain-Inspired Intelligence, Guangzhou, China. litaozjusc@zju.edu.cn.
(6)Key Laboratory of Animal Models and Human Disease Mechanisms of the Chinese 
Academy of Sciences and Yunnan Province, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan, China.
(7)Clinical Research Center & Division of Mood Disorders, Shanghai Mental Health 
Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(8)Institute of Molecular Precision Medicine and Hunan Key Laboratory of 
Molecular Precision Medicine, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 
Changsha, Hunan, China. huzhonghua@csu.edu.cn.
(9)Department of Critical Care Medicine, Xiangya Hospital, Central South 
University, Changsha, Hunan, China. huzhonghua@csu.edu.cn.
(10)Hunan Provincial Clinical Research Center for Critical Care Medicine, 
Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, China. 
huzhonghua@csu.edu.cn.
(11)Center for Medical Genetics and Hunan Key Laboratory of Medical Genetics, 
School of Life Sciences, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, China. 
huzhonghua@csu.edu.cn.
(12)National Clinical Research Center for Geriatric Disorders, Xiangya Hospital, 
Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, China. huzhonghua@csu.edu.cn.
(13)Hunan Key Laboratory of Animal Models for Human Diseases, School of Life 
Sciences, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, China. 
huzhonghua@csu.edu.cn.
(14)National Clinical Research Center on Mental Disorders, Changsha, Hunan, 
China. huzhonghua@csu.edu.cn.
(15)Clinical Research Center & Division of Mood Disorders, Shanghai Mental 
Health Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, 
China. yirufang@aliyun.com.
(16)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Psychotic Disorders, Shanghai, China. 
yirufang@aliyun.com.

Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have reported substantial genomic loci 
significantly associated with clinical risk of bipolar disorder (BD), and 
studies combining techniques of genetics, neuroscience, neuroimaging, and 
pharmacology are believed to help tackle clinical problems (e.g., identifying 
novel therapeutic targets). However, translating findings of psychiatric 
genetics into biological mechanisms underlying BD pathogenesis remains less 
successful. Biological impacts of majority of BD GWAS risk loci are obscure, and 
the involvement of many GWAS risk genes in this illness is yet to be 
investigated. It is thus necessary to review the progress of applying BD GWAS 
risk genes in the research and intervention of the disorder. A comprehensive 
literature search found that a number of such risk genes had been investigated 
in cellular or animal models, even before they were highlighted in BD GWAS. 
Intriguingly, manipulation of many BD risk genes (e.g., ANK3, CACNA1C, CACNA1B, 
HOMER1, KCNB1, MCHR1, NCAN, SHANK2 etc.) resulted in altered murine behaviors 
largely restoring BD clinical manifestations, including mania-like symptoms such 
as hyperactivity, anxiolytic-like behavior, as well as antidepressant-like 
behavior, and these abnormalities could be attenuated by mood stabilizers. In 
addition to recapitulating phenotypic characteristics of BD, some GWAS risk 
genes further provided clues for the neurobiology of this illness, such as 
aberrant activation and functional connectivity of brain areas in the limbic 
system, and modulated dendritic spine morphogenesis as well as synaptic 
plasticity and transmission. Therefore, BD GWAS risk genes are undoubtedly 
pivotal resources for modeling this illness, and might be translational 
therapeutic targets in the future clinical management of BD. We discuss both 
promising prospects and cautions in utilizing the bulk of useful resources 
generated by GWAS studies. Systematic integrations of findings from genetic and 
neuroscience studies are called for to promote our understanding and 
intervention of BD.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41380-022-01523-9
PMID: 35351989 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Mar 30;23(7):3807. doi: 10.3390/ijms23073807.

Identification and New Indication of Melanin-Concentrating Hormone Receptor 1 
(MCHR1) Antagonist Derived from Machine Learning and Transcriptome-Based Drug 
Repositioning Approaches.

Lim G(1), You KY(1)(2), Lee JH(1)(2), Jeon MK(1), Lee BH(1), Ryu JY(3), Oh 
KS(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Data Convergence Drug Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Chemical 
Technology, 141 Gajeong-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 34114, Korea.
(2)Graduate School of New Drug Discovery and Development, Chungnam National 
University, Daejeon 34134, Korea.
(3)Department of Biotechnology, Duksung Women's University, 33 Samyang-ro 
144-gil, Dobong-gu, Seoul 01369, Korea.
(4)Department of Medicinal and Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of Science 
and Technology, 217 Gajeong-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 34113, Korea.

Melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1) has been a target for appetite 
suppressants, which are helpful in treating obesity. However, it is challenging 
to develop an MCHR1 antagonist because its binding site is similar to that of 
the human Ether-à-go-go-Related Gene (hERG) channel, whose inhibition may cause 
cardiotoxicity. Most drugs developed as MCHR1 antagonists have failed in 
clinical development due to cardiotoxicity caused by hERG inhibition. Machine 
learning-based prediction models can overcome these difficulties and provide new 
opportunities for drug discovery. In this study, we identified KRX-104130 with 
potent MCHR1 antagonistic activity and no cardiotoxicity through virtual 
screening using two MCHR1 binding affinity prediction models and an hERG-induced 
cardiotoxicity prediction model. In addition, we explored other possibilities 
for expanding the new indications for KRX-104130 using a transcriptome-based 
drug repositioning approach. KRX-104130 increased the expression of low-density 
lipoprotein receptor (LDLR), which induced cholesterol reduction in the gene 
expression analysis. This was confirmed by comparison with gene expression in a 
nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) patient group. In a NASH mouse model, the 
administration of KRX-104130 showed a protective effect by reducing hepatic 
lipid accumulation, liver injury, and histopathological changes, indicating a 
promising prospect for the therapeutic effect of NASH as a new indication for 
MCHR1 antagonists.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23073807
PMCID: PMC8998904
PMID: 35409167 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.421. Front Pharmacol. 2022 Aug 9;13:906057. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2022.906057. 
eCollection 2022.

Melanin-concentrating hormone promotes anxiety and intestinal dysfunction via 
basolateral amygdala in mice.

He X(1), Li Y(1), Zhang N(2), Huang J(1), Ming X(1), Guo R(1), Hu Y(3), Ji P(3), 
Guo F(1).

Author information:
(1)Pathophysiology Department, School of Basic Medicine, Qingdao University, 
Qingdao, China.
(2)Department of Clinical Laboratory, the Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao 
University, Qingdao, China.
(3)Qingdao Medical College, Qingdao University, Qingdao, China.

The limbic system plays a pivotal role in stress-induced anxiety and intestinal 
disorders, but how the functional circuits between nuclei within the limbic 
system are engaged in the processing is still unclear. In our study, the results 
of fluorescence gold retrograde tracing and fluorescence immunohistochemistry 
showed that the melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) neurons of the lateral 
hypothalamic area (LHA) projected to the basolateral amygdala (BLA). Both 
chemogenetic activation of MCH neurons and microinjection of MCH into the BLA 
induced anxiety disorder in mice, which were reversed by intra-BLA 
microinjection of MCH receptor 1 (MCHR1) blocker SNAP-94847. In the chronic 
acute combining stress (CACS) stimulated mice, SNAP94847 administrated in the 
BLA ameliorated anxiety-like behaviors and improved intestinal dysfunction via 
reducing intestinal permeability and inflammation. In conclusion, MCHergic 
circuit from the LHA to the BLA participates in the regulation of anxiety-like 
behavior in mice, and this neural pathway is related to the intestinal 
dysfunction in CACS mice by regulating intestinal permeability and inflammation.

Copyright © 2022 He, Li, Zhang, Huang, Ming, Guo, Hu, Ji and Guo.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2022.906057
PMCID: PMC9395614
PMID: 36016574

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


422. Front Neurosci. 2022 Sep 13;16:952275. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2022.952275. 
eCollection 2022.

The melanin-concentrating hormone system as a target for the treatment of sleep 
disorders.

Potter LE(1)(2), Burgess CR(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, Michigan Medicine, Ann 
Arbor, MI, United States.
(2)Michigan Neuroscience Institute, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 
United States.

Given the widespread prevalence of sleep disorders and their impacts on health, 
it is critical that researchers continue to identify and evaluate novel avenues 
of treatment. Recently the melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) system has 
attracted commercial and scientific interest as a potential target of 
pharmacotherapy for sleep disorders. This interest emerges from basic scientific 
research demonstrating a role for MCH in regulating sleep, and particularly REM 
sleep. In addition to this role in sleep regulation, the MCH system and the MCH 
receptor 1 (MCHR1) have been implicated in a wide variety of other physiological 
functions and behaviors, including feeding/metabolism, reward, anxiety, 
depression, and learning. The basic research literature on sleep and the MCH 
system, and the history of MCH drug development, provide cause for both 
skepticism and cautious optimism about the prospects of MCH-targeting drugs in 
sleep disorders. Extensive efforts have focused on developing MCHR1 antagonists 
for use in obesity, however, few of these drugs have advanced to clinical 
trials, and none have gained regulatory approval. Additional basic research will 
be needed to fully characterize the MCH system's role in sleep regulation, for 
example, to fully differentiate between MCH-neuron and peptide/receptor-mediated 
functions. Additionally, a number of issues relating to drug design will 
continue to pose a practical challenge for novel pharmacotherapies targeting the 
MCH system.

Copyright © 2022 Potter and Burgess.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2022.952275
PMCID: PMC9513178
PMID: 36177357

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


423. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2023 Apr 20;123:110703. doi: 
10.1016/j.pnpbp.2022.110703. Epub 2022 Dec 21.

Acute intrahippocampal administration of melanin-concentrating hormone impairs 
memory consolidation and decreases the expression of MCHR-1 and TrkB receptors.

Ruiz-Viroga V(1), de Ceglia M(2), Morelli L(3), Castaño EM(4), Calvo EB(5), 
Suárez J(6), Rodríguez de Fonseca F(7), Galeano P(8), Lagos P(9).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Fisiología, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de la 
República, Gral. Flores 2125, Montevideo ZP11800, Uruguay.
(2)UGC Salud Mental, Instituto de Investigación Biomédica de Málaga (IBIMA), 
Hospital Regional Universitario de Málaga, Universidad de Málaga, Av. Carlos 
Haya 82, Málaga 29010, Spain. Electronic address: marialuisa.deceglia@ibima.eu.
(3)Laboratory of Brain Aging and Neurodegeneration, Fundación Instituto Leloir 
(IIBBA-CONICET), Av. Patricias Argentinas 435, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires 
C1405BWE, Argentina. Electronic address: lmorelli@leloir.org.ar.
(4)Laboratory of Brain Aging and Neurodegeneration, Fundación Instituto Leloir 
(IIBBA-CONICET), Av. Patricias Argentinas 435, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires 
C1405BWE, Argentina. Electronic address: ecastano@leloir.org.ar.
(5)Instituto de Investigación Biomédica de Málaga (IBIMA), Departamento de 
Psicobiología y Metodología de las Ciencias del Comportamiento, Universidad de 
Málaga, Campus de Teatinos S/N, Málaga 29071, Spain. Electronic address: 
eduardo.blanco@uma.es.
(6)Instituto de Investigación Biomédica de Málaga (IBIMA), Departamento de 
Anatomía Humana, Medicina Legal e Historia de la Ciencia, Universidad de Málaga, 
Málaga 29071, Spain. Electronic address: juan.suarez@ibima.eu.
(7)UGC Salud Mental, Instituto de Investigación Biomédica de Málaga (IBIMA), 
Hospital Regional Universitario de Málaga, Universidad de Málaga, Av. Carlos 
Haya 82, Málaga 29010, Spain. Electronic address: fernando.rodriguez@ibima.eu.
(8)Laboratory of Brain Aging and Neurodegeneration, Fundación Instituto Leloir 
(IIBBA-CONICET), Av. Patricias Argentinas 435, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires 
C1405BWE, Argentina. Electronic address: pgaleano@leloir.org.ar.
(9)Departamento de Fisiología, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de la 
República, Gral. Flores 2125, Montevideo ZP11800, Uruguay. Electronic address: 
plagos@fmed.edu.uy.

Interest in the role of melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) in memory processes 
has increased in recent years, with some studies reporting memory-enhancing 
effects, while others report deleterious effects. Due to these discrepancies, 
this study seeks to provide new evidence about the role of MCH in memory 
consolidation and its relation with BDNF/TrkB system. To this end, in the first 
experiment, increased doses of MCH were acutely administered in both hippocampi 
to groups of male rats (25, 50, 200, and 500 ng). Microinjections were carried 
out immediately after finishing the sample trial of two hippocampal-dependent 
behavioral tasks: the Novel Object Recognition Test (NORT) and the modified 
Elevated Plus Maze (mEPM) test. Results indicated that a dose of 200 ng of MCH 
or higher impaired memory consolidation in both tasks. A second experiment was 
performed in which a dose of 200 ng of MCH was administered alone or 
co-administered with the MCHR-1 antagonist ATC-0175 at the end of the sample 
trial in the NORT. Results showed that MCH impaired memory consolidation, while 
the co-administration with ATC-0175 reverted this detrimental effect. Moreover, 
MCH induced a significant decrease in hippocampal MCHR-1 and TrkB expression 
with no modification in the expression of BDNF and NMDA receptor subunits NR1, 
NR2A, and NR2B. These results suggest that MCH in vivo elicits pro-amnesic 
effects in the rat hippocampus by decreasing the availability of its receptor 
and TrkB receptors, thus linking both endogenous systems to memory processes.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2022.110703
PMID: 36565982 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest None.


424. J Oncol. 2023 Feb 4;2023:4640563. doi: 10.1155/2023/4640563. eCollection
2023.

Identification of Prognostic Markers of DNA Damage and Oxidative Stress in 
Diagnosing Papillary Renal Cell Carcinoma Based on High-Throughput 
Bioinformatics Screening.

Li L(1), Liu X(2), Wen Y(3), Liu P(1), Sun T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Emergency, Zhuzhou Hospital Affiliated to Xiangya School of 
Medicine, Central South University, Zhuzhou 412007, China.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Zhuzhou Hospital Affiliated to Xiangya School of 
Medicine, Central South University, Zhuzhou 412007, China.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, The First People's Hospital of Changde City, 
Changde 415000, China.

PURPOSE: Papillary renal cell carcinoma (pRCC) is the second most common 
histological subtype of adult kidney tumors, with a poor prognosis due to 
limited understanding of the disease mechanism. Herein, we have performed 
high-throughput bioinformatic screening to explore and identify potential 
biomarkers of DNA damage and oxidative stress for pRCC.
METHODS: RNA sequencing data related to pRCC were downloaded from the TCGA 
database, and differentially expressed genes (DEG) were identified by a wide 
variety of clustering and classification algorithms, including self-organized 
maps (SOM), artificial neural networks (ANN), support vector machines (SVM), 
fuzzy logic, and hyphenated techniques such as neuro-fuzzy networks. Then DAVID 
and STRING online biological information tools were used to analyze functional 
enrichment of the regulatory networks of DEG and construct a protein-protein 
interaction (PPI) network, and then the Cytoscape software was used to identify 
hub genes. The importance of key genes was assessed by the analysis of the 
Kaplan-Meier survival curves using the R software. Lastly, we have analyzed the 
expression of hub genes of DNA damage and oxidative stress (BDKRB1, NMUR2, PMCH, 
and SAA1) in pRCC tissues and adjacent normal tissues, as well as the 
relationship between the expression of hub genes in pRCC tissues and 
pathological characteristics and prognosis of pRCC patients.
RESULTS: A total of 1,992 DEGs for pRCC were identified, with 1,142 upregulated 
ones and 850 downregulated ones. The DEGs were significantly enriched in 
activities including DNA damage and oxidative stress, chemical synaptic 
transmission, an integral component of the membrane, calcium ion binding, and 
neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction. cytoHubba in the Cytoscape software was 
used to determine the top 10 hub genes in the PPI network as BDKRB2, NMUR2, NMU, 
BDKRB1, LPAR5, KNG1, LPAR3, SAA1, MCHR1, PMCH, and NCAPH. Furthermore, the 
expression level of hub genes BDKRB1, NMUR2, PMCH, and SAA1 in pRCC tissues was 
significantly higher than that in the adjacent normal tissues. Meanwhile, the 
expression level of hub genes BDKRB1, NMUR2, PMCH, and SAA1 in pRCC tissues was 
significantly positively correlated with tumor stage, lymph node metastasis, and 
the histopathology grade of pRCC. In addition, high expression levels of hub 
genes BDKRB1, NMUR2, PMCH, and SAA1 were associated with a poor prognosis for 
patients with pRCC. Univariate and multivariate analyses showed that the 
expression of hub genes BDKRB1, NMUR2, PMCH, and SAA1 were independent risk 
factors for the prognosis of patients with pRCC.
CONCLUSION: The results of this analysis suggested that BDKRB1, NMUR2, PMCH, and 
SAA1 might be potential prognostic biomarkers and novel therapeutic targets for 
pRCC.

Copyright © 2023 Le Li et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2023/4640563
PMCID: PMC9922175
PMID: 36785669

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interests.


425. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2023 Mar 15;84:129194. doi:
10.1016/j.bmcl.2023.129194.  Epub 2023 Feb 20.

Structure-based design of novel melanin-concentrating hormone receptor-1 ligands 
based on saturated nitrogen-containing heterocycles.

Helal MA(1), Chittiboyina AG(2), Avery MA(3).

Author information:
(1)University of Science and Technology, Biomedical Sciences Program, Zewail 
City of Science and Technology, October Gardens, 6th of October, Giza 12578, 
Egypt; Medicinal Chemistry Department, Faculty of Pharmacy, Suez Canal 
University, Ismailia 41522, Egypt.
(2)National Center for Natural Products Research, School of Pharmacy, University 
of Mississippi, University, MS 38677, United States.
(3)Department of BioMolecular Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of 
Mississippi, University, MS 38677, United States.

Melanin Concentrating Hormone (MCH) receptor is a G protein-coupled receptor 
(GPCR) with two subtypes R1 and R2. MCH-R1 is involved in the control of energy 
homeostasis, feeding behavior and body weight. Many studies have proved that 
administration of MCH-R1 antagonists significantly reduces food intake and 
causes weight loss in animal models. Herein, we report the optimization of our 
previously reported virtual screening hits into novel MCH-R1 ligands with chiral 
aliphatic nitrogen-containing scaffolds. The activity was improved from the 
micromolar range of the initial leads to 7 nM. We also disclose the first MCH-R1 
ligands based on a diazaspiro[4.5]decane nucleus with sub-micromolar activity. A 
potent MCH-R1 antagonist with acceptable pharmacokinetic profile could represent 
a new hope for the management of obesity.

Copyright © 2023. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2023.129194
PMID: 36813053 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


426. Front Psychiatry. 2023 Feb 7;14:1115924. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2023.1115924. 
eCollection 2023.

Genomic regulatory sequences in the pathogenesis of bipolar disorder.

Levchenko A(1), Plotnikova M(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Translational Biomedicine, Saint Petersburg State University, 
Saint Petersburg, Russia.
(2)Vavilov Institute of General Genetics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, 
Russia.
(3)Center for Genetics and Life Science, Sirius University of Science and 
Technology, Sochi, Russia.

The lifetime prevalence of bipolar disorder is estimated to be about 2%. 
Epigenetics defines regulatory mechanisms that determine relatively stable 
patterns of gene expression by controlling all key steps, from DNA to messenger 
RNA to protein. This Mini Review highlights recent discoveries of modified 
epigenetic control resulting from genetic variants associated with bipolar 
disorder in genome-wide association studies. The revealed epigenetic 
abnormalities implicate gene transcription and post-transcriptional regulation. 
In the light of these discoveries, the Mini Review focuses on the genes PACS1, 
MCHR1, DCLK3, HAPLN4, LMAN2L, TMEM258, GNL3, LRRC57, CACNA1C, CACNA1D, and NOVA2 
and their potential biological role in the pathogenesis of bipolar disorder. 
Molecular mechanisms under control of these genes do not translate into a 
unified picture and substantially more research is needed to fill the gaps in 
knowledge and to solve current limitations in prognosis and treatment of bipolar 
disorder. In conclusion, the genetic and functional studies confirm the complex 
nature of bipolar disorder and indicate future research directions to explore 
possible targeted treatment options, eventually working toward a personalized 
approach.

Copyright © 2023 Levchenko and Plotnikova.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyt.2023.1115924
PMCID: PMC9941178
PMID: 36824672

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


427. eNeuro. 2023 Mar 13;10(3):ENEURO.0360-22.2023. doi:
10.1523/ENEURO.0360-22.2023.  Print 2023 Mar.

Physiological Condition-Dependent Changes in Ciliary GPCR Localization in the 
Brain.

Brewer KM(1), Engle SE(1), Bansal R(1), Brewer KK(1), Jasso KR(2), McIntyre 
JC(2), Vaisse C(3), Reiter JF(4), Berbari NF(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis, 
Indianapolis, Indiana 46202.
(2)Department of Neuroscience and Center for Smell and Taste, University of 
Florida, Gainesville, Florida 32603.
(3)Diabetes Center and Department of Medicine, University of California San 
Francisco, San Francisco, California 94143.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Cardiovascular Research Institute, 
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California 94158.
(5)Department of Biology, Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis, 
Indianapolis, Indiana 46202 nberbari@iupui.edu.
(6)Stark Neurosciences Research Institute, Indiana University, Indianapolis, 
Indiana 46202.
(7)Center for Diabetes and Metabolic Diseases, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202.

Primary cilia are cellular appendages critical for diverse types of Signaling. 
They are found on most cell types, including cells throughout the CNS. Cilia 
preferentially localize certain G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) and are 
critical for mediating the signaling of these receptors. Several of these 
neuronal GPCRs have recognized roles in feeding behavior and energy homeostasis. 
Cell and model systems, such as Caenorhabditis elegans and Chlamydomonas, have 
implicated both dynamic GPCR cilia localization and cilia length and shape 
changes as key for signaling. It is unclear whether mammalian ciliary GPCRs use 
similar mechanisms in vivo and under what conditions these processes may occur. 
Here, we assess two neuronal cilia GPCRs, melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 
1 (MCHR1) and neuropeptide-Y receptor 2 (NPY2R), as mammalian model ciliary 
receptors in the mouse brain. We test the hypothesis that dynamic localization 
to cilia occurs under physiological conditions associated with these GPCR 
functions. Both receptors are involved in feeding behaviors, and MCHR1 is also 
associated with sleep and reward. Cilia were analyzed with a computer-assisted 
approach allowing for unbiased and high-throughput analysis. We measured cilia 
frequency, length, and receptor occupancy. We observed changes in ciliary 
length, receptor occupancy, and cilia frequency under different conditions for 
one receptor but not another and in specific brain regions. These data suggest 
that dynamic cilia localization of GPCRs depends on properties of individual 
receptors and cells where they are expressed. A better understanding of 
subcellular localization dynamics of ciliary GPCRs could reveal unknown 
molecular mechanisms regulating behaviors like feeding.

Copyright © 2023 Brewer et al.

DOI: 10.1523/ENEURO.0360-22.2023
PMCID: PMC10012409
PMID: 36849261 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.


428. Methods Cell Biol. 2023;175:69-83. doi: 10.1016/bs.mcb.2022.09.007. Epub
2023  Jan 3.

Evaluation of ciliary-GPCR dynamics using a validated organotypic brain slice 
culture method.

Kobayashi Y(1), Saito Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Integrated Sciences for Life, Hiroshima University, 
Hiroshima, Japan.
(2)Graduate School of Integrated Sciences for Life, Hiroshima University, 
Hiroshima, Japan. Electronic address: yumist@hiroshima-u.ac.jp.

The primary cilium is a structural organelle present in most mammalian cells. 
Primary cilia are enriched with a unique protein repertoire distinct from that 
of the cytosol and the plasma membrane. Such a highly organized microenvironment 
creates effective machinery for translating extracellular cues into 
intracellular signals. G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are key receptors in 
sensing environmental stimuli transmitted via a second messenger into a cellular 
response. Recent data has demonstrated that a limited number of non-olfactory 
GPCRs, including melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1), are 
preferentially localized to ciliary membranes of several mammalian cell types, 
including neuronal cells. Evidence was accumulated to support the functional 
importance of ciliary-GPCR signaling accompanying ciliary structural changes 
using cilia-specific cell and molecular biology techniques. Thus, cilia are now 
considered to function as a unique sensory platform for the integration of GPCR 
signaling and various cytoplasmic domains. Dissociated neurons expressing 
ciliary-GPCRs can be a useful tool for examining ciliary dynamics. However, 
losing preexisting neuronal connectivity may alter neuronal ciliary morphology, 
such as abnormal elongation. Brain slices prepared under ex vitro conditions are 
a powerful approach that maintains the cytoarchitecture, enabling researchers to 
have accurate control over experimental conditions and to study individual cells 
from subregions of the brain. Here, we present a detailed description of our 
novel modified method for organotypic culture of rat brain slice and a validated 
immunostaining protocol to characterize ciliary-GPCR dynamics in coupling with 
neuropeptides or aminergic activation.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.mcb.2022.09.007
PMID: 36967146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


429. J Bioenerg Biomembr. 2023 Dec;55(6):435-446. doi:
10.1007/s10863-023-09993-4.  Epub 2023 Nov 9.

Computational prediction of analog compounds of the membrane protein MCHR1 
antagonists ALB-127158 and KRX-104130.

Sariyer E(1), Sariyer AS(2).

Author information:
(1)Vocational School of Health Services, Medical Laboratory Techniques, Artvin 
Coruh University, Artvin, Turkey. esariyer@artvin.edu.tr.
(2)Faculty of Health Sciences, Department of Nutrition and Dietetics, Artvin 
Coruh University, Artvin, Turkey.

Obesity, which is already pervasive throughout the world, endangers public 
health by raising the prevalence of metabolic disorders and making their 
treatment more difficult. The development of drugs to treat obesity is a focus 
of effort. Melanin concentrated hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1) is the target of some 
of these therapeutic possibilities since as increased levels of melanin 
concentrated hormone have been found in obesity models. Known MCHR1 antagonists 
include BMS-830216, GW-856464, NGD-4715, ALB-127158, and AMG 076, but many have 
failed phase-I clinical studies. As a potential treatment for cardiotoxicity, 
KRX-104130 has only recently been identified. As MCH system is potentially 
effective target for treatment of obesity, in silico research into interaction 
between MCHR1 and its antagonists at molecular level was the primary goal of 
this study. Analogues ALB-127158 and KRX-104130 were screened among the 
RealEnamine library. The complexes obtained by molecular docking were embedded 
in mimics brain-cell membrane and simulated for 540 ns, and then MM-GBSA were 
calculated with MMPBSA.py. With all these computational studies, similar or 
different aspects of selected analogous compounds to ALB-127158 and KRX-104130 
were investigated. The specificity of this study was that it analyzed MCHR1 
protein as embedded in membrane. It was concluded that KRX-104130's analogue 
Z1922310273 and ALB-127158's analogue PV-002757495233 did not cause a difference 
in terms of phospholipid membrane properties. In addition, all ligands remained 
stable in putative binding site. It has been suggested that PV-002757495233 and 
Z1922310273 compounds can be evaluated as MCHR1 antagonists when all these 
outputs are considered in melting pots.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s10863-023-09993-4
PMID: 37940722 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2023 Dec 22:pyad069. doi: 10.1093/ijnp/pyad069. 
Online ahead of print.

Chronic stress-induced elevation of melanin-concentrating hormone in the locus 
coeruleus inhibits norepinephrine production and associated with depression-like 
behaviors in rats.

Kurban N(1), Qin Y(1), Zhao HL(1), Hu X(1), Chen X(1), Zhao YY(1), Peng YS(1), 
Wang HB(2), Cui SY(1)(2), Zhang YH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Peking University, School of Basic Medical 
Science, Beijing 100191, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacology and Drug Evaluation, Ministry of 
Education, Yantai University, Yantai 264005, China.

BACKGROUND: Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a hypothalamic neuropeptide 
that projects throughout the central nervous system, including the noradrenergic 
locus coeruleus (LC). Our previous study suggested that MCH/MCH receptor 1 
(MCHR1) in the LC may be involved in the regulation of depression. The present 
study investigated whether the role of MCH/MCHR1 in the LC in depression-like 
behaviors is associated with the regulation of norepinephrine.
METHOD: Chronic unpredictable stress (CUS) and an acute intra-LC microinjection 
of MCH induced depression-like behaviors in rats. The MCHR1 antagonist 
SNAP-94847 was also microinjected in the LC in rats that were suffered CUS or 
treated with MCH. The sucrose preference, forced swim, and locomotor tests were 
used for behavioral evaluation. Immunofluorescence staining, ELISA, western blot 
and HPLC-ECD were used to explore the mechanism of MCH/MCHR1 in the regulation 
of depression-like behaviors.
RESULTS: CUS induced an abnormal elevation of MCH levels and downregulated MCHR1 
in the LC, which was highly correlated with the formation of depression-like 
behaviors. SNAP-94847 exerted antidepressant effects in CUS-exposed rats by 
normalizing tyrosine hydroxylase, dopamine β hydroxylase, and norepinephrine in 
the LC. An acute microinjection of MCH induced depression-like behaviors through 
its action on MCHR1. MCHR1 antagonism in the LC significantly reversed the 
MCH-induced downregulation of norepinephrine production by normalizing 
MCHR1-medicated cAMP-PKA signaling.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study confirmed that the MCH/MCHR1 system in the LC may be 
involved in depression-like behaviors by downregulating norepinephrine 
production. These results improve our understanding of the pathogenesis of 
depression that is related to the MCH/MCHR1 system in the LC.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of CINP.

DOI: 10.1093/ijnp/pyad069
PMID: 38135278
