1. Nature. 1999 Jul 15;400(6741):261-5. doi: 10.1038/22313.

Melanin-concentrating hormone is the cognate ligand for the orphan 
G-protein-coupled receptor SLC-1.

Chambers J(1), Ames RS, Bergsma D, Muir A, Fitzgerald LR, Hervieu G, Dytko GM, 
Foley JJ, Martin J, Liu WS, Park J, Ellis C, Ganguly S, Konchar S, Cluderay J, 
Leslie R, Wilson S, Sarau HM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Screening Technologies, New Frontiers Science Park, 
SmithKline Beecham Pharmaceuticals, Harlow, Essex, UK. Jon_Chambers-1@sbphrd.com

The underlying causes of obesity are poorly understood but probably involve 
complex interactions between many neurotransmitter and neuropeptide systems 
involved in the regulation of food intake and energy balance. Three pieces of 
evidence indicate that the neuropeptide melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is 
an important component of this system. First, MCH stimulates feeding when 
injected directly into rat brains; second, the messenger RNA for the MCH 
precursor is upregulated in the hypothalamus of genetically obese mice and in 
fasted animals; and third, mice lacking MCH eat less and are lean. MCH 
antagonists might, therefore, provide a treatment for obesity. However, the 
development of such molecules has been hampered because the identity of the MCH 
receptor has been unknown until now. Here we show that the 353-amino-acid human 
orphan G-protein-coupled receptor SLC-1 expressed in HEK293 cells binds MCH with 
sub-nanomolar affinity, and is stimulated by MCH to mobilize intracellular Ca2+ 
and reduce forskolin-elevated cyclic AMP levels. We also show that SLC-1 
messenger RNA and protein is expressed in the ventromedial and dorsomedial 
nuclei of the hypothalamus, consistent with a role for SLC-1 in mediating the 
effects of MCH on feeding.

DOI: 10.1038/22313
PMID: 10421367 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
