1. Endocrinology. 2001 Feb;142(2):680-6. doi: 10.1210/endo.142.2.7981.

Melanin-concentrating hormone receptor is a target of leptin action in the mouse 
brain.

Kokkotou EG(1), Tritos NA, Mastaitis JW, Slieker L, Maratos-Flier E.

Author information:
(1)Joslin Diabetes Center and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 
02215, USA.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a hypothalamic neuropeptide that is 
important in the regulation of energy homeostasis. MCH signals via a 
seven-transmembrane G protein-coupled receptor, which is coupled to Galpha(i). 
This receptor was initially cloned in rat and human and designated SLC-1 because 
of its homology to the somatostatin receptor. In rat brain, it is expressed in a 
pattern that mirrors the previously described pattern of projections of 
MCH-immunoreactive fibers. In the present study we cloned the mouse MCH receptor 
(MCH-R) ortholog by a rapid amplification of 5'- and 3'-cDNA ends approach and 
have found it to be 98% homologous with the rat sequence. We have characterized 
MCH-R messenger RNA distribution in the mouse brain by in situ hybridization and 
have shown MCH-R to be expressed in diverse brain areas implicated in the 
regulation of feeding, body adiposity, and sensory integration of smell and 
gustatory inputs, including the hypothalamus [paraventricular nucleus 
(magnocellular part) and dorsomedial, ventromedial, and arcuate nucleus], areas 
of the olfactory pathway, and the nucleus of the solitary tract. We also studied 
MCH-R regulation and found that MCH-R expression is increased 7-fold by 48-h 
fasting or genetic leptin deficiency (ob/ob mice) and is completely blunted by 
leptin administration. In contrast, MCH-R messenger RNA expression remains 
unaltered in genetic MCH deficiency. Our findings suggest that MCH-R constitutes 
a central target of leptin action in the mammalian brain.

DOI: 10.1210/endo.142.2.7981
PMID: 11159839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
