1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Apr 27;276(17):13554-62. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M010727200. Epub 
2001 Jan 18.

Structure-activity relationship studies of melanin-concentrating hormone 
(MCH)-related peptide ligands at SLC-1, the human MCH receptor.

Audinot V(1), Beauverger P, Lahaye C, Suply T, Rodriguez M, Ouvry C, Lamamy V, 
Imbert J, Rique H, Nahon JL, Galizzi JP, Canet E, Levens N, Fauchere JL, Boutin 
JA.

Author information:
(1)Division de Pharmacologie Mol√©culaire et Cellulaire, Institut de Recherches 
SERVIER, 78290-Croissy sur Seine, France.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a cyclic nonadecapeptide involved in the 
regulation of feeding behavior, which acts through a G protein-coupled receptor 
(SLC-1) inhibiting adenylcyclase activity. In this study, 57 analogues of MCH 
were investigated on the recently cloned human MCH receptor stably expressed in 
HEK293 cells, on both the inhibition of forskolin-stimulated cAMP production and 
guanosine-5'-O-(3-[(35)S]thiotriphosphate ([(35)S]- GTPgammaS) binding. The 
dodecapeptide MCH-(6-17) (MCH ring between Cys(7) and Cys(16), with a single 
extra amino acid at the N terminus (Arg(6)) and at the C terminus (Trp(17))) was 
found to be the minimal sequence required for a full and potent agonistic 
response on cAMP formation and [(35)S]- GTPgammaS binding. We Ala-scanned this 
dodecapeptide and found that only 3 of 8 amino acids of the ring, namely Met(8), 
Arg(11), and Tyr(13), were essential to elicit full and potent responses in both 
tests. Deletions inside the ring led either to inactivity or to poor antagonists 
with potencies in the micromolar range. Cys(7) and Cys(16) were substituted by 
Asp and Lys or one of their analogues, in an attempt to replace the disulfide 
bridge by an amide bond. However, those modifications were deleterious for 
agonistic activity. In [(35)S]- GTPgammaS binding, these compounds behaved as 
weak antagonists (K(B) 1-4 microm). Finally, substitution in MCH-(6-17) of 6 out 
of 12 amino acids by non-natural residues and concomitant replacement of the 
disulfide bond by an amide bond led to three compounds with potent antagonistic 
properties (K(B) = 0.1-0.2 microm). Exploitation of these structure-activity 
relationships should open the way to the design of short and stable MCH peptide 
antagonists.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M010727200
PMID: 11278733 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
