1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 May 25;283(5):1013-8. doi: 
10.1006/bbrc.2001.4893.

Cloning of a novel G protein-coupled receptor, SLT, a subtype of the 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptor.

Mori M(1), Harada M, Terao Y, Sugo T, Watanabe T, Shimomura Y, Abe M, Shintani 
Y, Onda H, Nishimura O, Fujino M.

Author information:
(1)Discovery Research Laboratories I, Pharmaceutical Research Division, Takeda 
Chemical Industries, Ltd., Wadai 10, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 300-4293, Japan. 
Mori_Masaaski@takeda.co.jp

A DNA fragment encoding an amino acid sequence possessing common features to the 
G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) superfamily was found in the human genomic 
sequence, and from this information, the full-length cDNA of a novel GPCR, 
designated SLT, was cloned from the human hippocampus cDNA library. SLT showed 
the highest homology to the melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) receptor, SLC-1 
(31.5% identity), and to a lesser extent, to the somatostatin (SST) receptor 
subtypes. MCH exhibited agonistic behavior when applied to the SLT-expressing 
CHO cells at subnanomolar doses whereas more than 200 known peptides, including 
SST and cortistatin, did not. These results indicated that MCH is the cognate 
ligand of the SLT receptor and that this newly cloned GPCR is the second subtype 
of the MCH receptor. Quantitative polymerase chain reaction analysis of the SLT 
gene expression in human tissues showed that the SLT receptor is expressed 
mainly in brain areas including the cerebral cortex, amygdala, hippocampus, and 
corpus callosum, as well as in a limited number of peripheral tissues. The 
distribution of the SLT nearly overlapped that of SLC-1, suggesting that some of 
the neural functions of MCH may be mediated by both of these receptor subtypes.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/bbrc.2001.4893
PMID: 11355873 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
