1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Sep 14;276(37):34664-70. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M102601200. Epub 
2001 Jul 17.

Identification and pharmacological characterization of a novel human 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptor, mch-r2.

Wang S(1), Behan J, O'Neill K, Weig B, Fried S, Laz T, Bayne M, Gustafson E, 
Hawes BE.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Human Genomics and Central Nervous System Biology, 
Schering-Plough Research Institute, Kenilworth, New Jersey 07033, USA.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a neuropeptide highly expressed in the 
brain that regulates several physiological functions mediated by receptors in 
the G protein-coupled receptor family. Recently an orphan receptor, SLC-1, has 
been identified as an MCH receptor (MCH-R1). Herein we identify and characterize 
a novel receptor for human MCH (MCH-R2). The receptor is composed of 340 amino 
acids encoded by a 1023-base pair cDNA and is 35% homologous to SLC-1. 
(125)I-MCH specifically bound to Chinese hamster ovary cells stably expressing 
MCH-R2. MCH stimulated dose-dependent increases in intracellular free Ca(2+) and 
inositol phosphate production in these cells but did not affect cAMP production. 
The pharmacological profile for mammalian MCH, [Phe(13),Tyr(19)]MCH, and salmon 
MCH at MCH-R2 differed compared with MCH-R1 as assessed by intracellular 
signaling and radioligand binding assays. The EC(50) in signaling assays and the 
IC(50) in radioligand binding assays of salmon MCH was an order of magnitude 
higher than mammalian MCH at MCH-R2. By comparison, the EC(50) and IC(50) values 
of salmon MCH and mammalian MCH at MCH-R1 were relatively similar. Blot 
hybridization revealed exclusive expression of MCH-R2 mRNA in several distinct 
brain regions, particularly in the cortical area, suggesting the involvement of 
MCH-R2 in the central regulation of MCH-mediated functions.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M102601200
PMID: 11459838 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
