1. Mol Pharmacol. 2001 Oct;60(4):632-9.

Cloning and molecular characterization of the novel human melanin-concentrating 
hormone receptor MCH2.

Rodriguez M(1), Beauverger P, Naime I, Rique H, Ouvry C, Souchaud S, Dromaint S, 
Nagel N, Suply T, Audinot V, Boutin JA, Galizzi JP.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Recherches Servier, Division de Pharmacologie Mol√©culaire et 
Cellulaire, Croissy sur Seine, France.

Using a genomics-based approach for screening orphan G-protein-coupled 
receptors, we have identified and cloned a novel high-affinity, 
melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) receptor. This receptor, named S643b, 
displays the greatest overall identity (32%) with the previously reported human 
SLC-1 receptor (MCH1) and to a lesser extent with the somatostatin receptor 
subtypes. The gene encoding the S643b receptor spans more than 23 kilobase pairs 
(kb) and was mapped, by radiation hybrid experiments, on chromosome 6q14.3-q15. 
Comparison of the S643b cDNA with human genomic sequence reveals that the 
340-amino-acid receptor is encoded by five exons. Its tissue distribution, as 
determined by Northern blot and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction 
analysis, indicates that a 4-kb transcript is predominantly expressed in the 
brain. When expressed in Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells, the S643b receptor 
displays a strong, dose-dependent, transient elevation of intracellular calcium 
in response to MCH (EC(50) = 9.5 nM). During the present study, we isolated a 
splice variant, designated S643a, encoding for a receptor that was not activated 
by MCH in a cellular calcium mobilization assay. Comparative pharmacological 
studies using CHO cells stably expressing either SLC-1 or S643b receptors 
demonstrated that similar structural features of MCH are required to stimulate 
intracellular Ca(2+) mobilization at both receptors. The identification and 
localization of this new MCH receptor (MCH2) provides further insight into the 
physiological implication of MCH in modulating behavioral responses, including 
food intake.

PMID: 11562423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
