1. Genomics. 2002 Jun;79(6):785-92. doi: 10.1006/geno.2002.6771.

Melanin-concentrating hormone receptor subtypes 1 and 2: species-specific gene 
expression.

Tan CP(1), Sano H, Iwaasa H, Pan J, Sailer AW, Hreniuk DL, Feighner SD, Palyha 
OC, Pong SS, Figueroa DJ, Austin CP, Jiang MM, Yu H, Ito J, Ito M, Ito M, Guan 
XM, MacNeil DJ, Kanatani A, Van der Ploeg LH, Howard AD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Obesity and Metabolic Research, Merck Research Laboratories, 
Rahway, NJ 07065, USA.

To assess the contribution of potential central nervous system pathways 
implicated in the control of appetite regulation and energy metabolism, it is 
essential to first identify appropriate animal models. Melanin-concentrating 
hormone (MCH), a conserved cyclic neuropeptide implicated in the modulation of 
food intake, has been shown to bind and activate two G-protein-coupled 
receptors, called GPR24 and MCHR2, expressed in human brain and other tissues. 
Here we show that several non-human species (rat, mouse, hamster, guinea pig, 
and rabbit) do not have functional MCHR2 receptors, or encode a nonfunctional 
MCHR2 pseudogene while retaining GPR24 expression. We identified three species 
for further evaluation that express both MCH receptor subtypes. We cloned and 
functionally characterized dog, ferret, and rhesus GPR24 and MCHR2 in mammalian 
cells and studied their brain distribution patterns by in situ hybridization. 
The homology, expression profile, and functional similarity of the receptors in 
the dog, ferret, and rhesus to that of human support the potential use of these 
species as preclinical animal models in the development of therapeutic agents 
for obesity or other MCH-mediated disorders.

(c)2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

DOI: 10.1006/geno.2002.6771
PMID: 12036292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
