1. Endocrinology. 2002 Jul;143(7):2469-77. doi: 10.1210/endo.143.7.8903.

Targeted disruption of the melanin-concentrating hormone receptor-1 results in 
hyperphagia and resistance to diet-induced obesity.

Chen Y(1), Hu C, Hsu CK, Zhang Q, Bi C, Asnicar M, Hsiung HM, Fox N, Slieker LJ, 
Yang DD, Heiman ML, Shi Y.

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Lilly Research Laboratories, Eli Lilly & Co., 
Indianapolis, Indiana 46285, USA.

The hypothalamic neuropeptide melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) has been 
implicated in a variety of physiological functions including the regulation of 
feeding and energy homeostasis. Two MCH receptors (MCHR1 and MCHR2) have been 
identified so far. To decipher the functional role of the MCH receptors, we have 
generated and phenotypically characterized mice rendered deficient in MCHR1 
expression by homologous recombination. Inactivation of MCHR1 results in mice 
(MCHR1-/-) that are resistant to diet-induced obesity. With a high-fat diet, 
body fat mass is significantly lower in both male (4.7 +/- 0.6 g vs. 9.6 +/- 1.2 
g) and female (3.9 +/- 0.2 vs. 5.8 +/- 0.5 g) MCHR1-/- mice than that of the 
wild-type control (P < 0.01), but the lean mass remains constant. When 
normalized to body weight, female mice are hyperphagic, and male mice are 
hyperphagic and hypermetabolic, compared with wild-type mice. Consistent with 
the lower fat mass, both leptin and insulin levels are significantly lower in 
male MCHR1-/- mice than in the wild-type controls. Our data firmly establish 
MCHR1 as a mediator of MCH effects on energy homeostasis and suggest that 
inactivation of MCHR1 alone is capable to counterbalance obesity induced by a 
high-fat diet.

DOI: 10.1210/endo.143.7.8903
PMID: 12072376 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
