1. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2002 Aug;302(2):766-73. doi: 10.1124/jpet.302.2.766.

Appetite-boosting property of pro-melanin-concentrating hormone(131-165) 
(neuropeptide-glutamic acid-isoleucine) is associated with proteolytic 
resistance.

Maulon-Feraille L(1), Della Zuana O, Suply T, Rovere-Jovene C, Audinot V, Levens 
N, Boutin JA, Duhault J, Nahon JL.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Pharmacologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire-Centre National de la 
Recherche Scientifique, Unité Mixte de Recherche 6097, 660 route des 
Lucioles-Sophia-Antipolis, 06560 Valbonne, France.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a cyclic neuropeptide, with a major role 
in stimulation of feeding behavior in mammals. MCH signals in the brain occur 
via two seven-transmembrane G protein-coupled receptors, namely MCH1 (SLC-1, 
MCH(1), MCH-R1, or MCH-1R) and MCH2 (SLT, MCH(2), MCH-R2, or MCH-2R). In this 
study, we demonstrate that the pro-MCH(131-165) peptide neuropeptide-glutamic 
acid-isoleucine (NEI)-MCH is more potent than MCH in stimulating feeding in the 
rat. Using rat MCH1-expressed human embryonic kidney 293 cells, we show that 
NEI-MCH exhibits 5-fold less affinity in a binding assay and 2-fold less potency 
in a cAMP assay than MCH. A similar 7- to 8-fold shift in potency was observed 
in a Ca(2+)(i) assay using rat MCH1 or human MCH2-transfected Chinese hamster 
ovary cell models. This demonstrates that NEI-MCH is not a better agonist than 
MCH at either of the MCH receptors. Then, we compared the proteolysis resistance 
of MCH and NEI-MCH to rat brain membrane homogenates and purified proteases. 
Kinetics of peptide degradation using brain extracts indicated a t(1/2) of 34.8 
min for MCH and 78.5 min for NEI-MCH with a specific pattern of cleavage of MCH 
but not NEI-MCH by exo- and endo-proteases. Furthermore, MCH was found highly 
susceptible to degradation by aminopeptidase M and endopeptidase 24.11, whereas 
NEI-MCH was fully resistant to proteolysis by these enzymes. Therefore, our 
results strongly suggest that reduced susceptibility to proteases of NEI-MCH 
compared with MCH account for its enhanced activity in feeding behavior. NEI-MCH 
represents therefore the first MCH natural functional "superagonist" so far 
described.

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.302.2.766
PMID: 12130742 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
