1. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2002 Sep;283(3):E584-92. doi: 
10.1152/ajpendo.00161.2002.

Melanin-concentrating hormone activates signaling pathways in 3T3-L1 adipocytes.

Bradley RL(1), Mansfield JP, Maratos-Flier E, Cheatham B.

Author information:
(1)Research Division, Joslin Diabetes Center and the Department of Medicine, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Energy homeostasis is regulated by peripheral signals, such as leptin, and by 
several orexigenic and anorectic neuropeptides. Recently, we reported that the 
orexigenic neuropeptide melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) stimulates leptin 
production by rat adipocytes and that the MCH receptor (MCH-R1) is present on 
these cells. Here, we show that MCH-R1 is present on murine 3T3-L1 adipocytes. 
Treatment of 3T3-L1 adipocytes with 1 micromolar MCH for up to 2 h acutely 
downregulated MCH-R1, indicating a mechanism of ligand-induced receptor 
downregulation. Potential signaling pathways mediating MCH-R1 action in 
adipocytes were investigated. Treatment of 3T3-L1 adipocytes with 1 micromolar 
MCH rapidly induced a threefold and a fivefold increase in p44/42 MAPK and pp70 
S6 kinase activities, respectively. In addition, 3T3-L1 adipocytes transiently 
transfected with a murine leptin-luciferase promoter construct showed a fourfold 
and a sixfold increase in leptin promoter-reporter gene expression at 1 h and 4 
h, respectively, in response to MCH. Activity decreased to basal levels at 8 h. 
Furthermore, MCH-stimulated leptin promoter-driven luciferase activity was 
diminished in the presence of the MAP/ERK kinase inhibitor PD-98059 and in the 
presence of rapamycin, an inhibitor of pp70 S6 kinase activation. These results 
provide further evidence for a functional MCH signaling pathway in adipocytes.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpendo.00161.2002
PMID: 12169453 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
