1. J Neuroendocrinol. 2003 Mar;15(3):268-72. doi:
10.1046/j.1365-2826.2003.00997.x.

Effect of direct injection of melanin-concentrating hormone into the 
paraventricular nucleus: further evidence for a stimulatory role in the adrenal 
axis via SLC-1.

Kennedy AR(1), Todd JF, Dhillo WS, Seal LJ, Ghatei MA, O'Toole CP, Jones M, 
Witty D, Winborne K, Riley G, Hervieu G, Wilson S, Bloom SR.

Author information:
(1)Imperial Centre for Obesity Research, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College, 
London, UK.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is implicated in the control of a number of 
hormonal axes including the hypothalamic-pituitary adrenal (HPA) axis. Previous 
studies have shown that there is evidence for both a stimulatory and an 
inhibitory action on the HPA axis; therefore, we attempted to further 
characterize the effects of MCH on this axis. Intracerebroventricular injection 
of MCH increased circulating adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) at 10 min post 
injection. Injection of MCH directly into the paraventricular nucleus (PVN) was 
found to increase both circulating ACTH and corticosterone 10 min after 
injection. Additionally, MCH was found to increase corticotropin-releasing 
factor (CRF) release from hypothalamic explants, and this effect was abolished 
by the specific SLC-1 antagonist SB-568849. Neuropeptide EI, a peptide from the 
same precursor as MCH was also found to increase CRF release from explants. 
These results suggest that MCH has a stimulatory role in the HPA axis via SLC-1, 
and that MCH exerts its effects predominantly through the PVN CRF neuronal 
populations

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2826.2003.00997.x
PMID: 12588515 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
