1. J Recept Signal Transduct Res. 2003 Feb;23(1):69-81. doi:
10.1081/rrs-120018761.

Different structural requirements for melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) 
interacting with rat MCH-R1 (SLC-1) and mouse B16 cell MCH-R.

Schlumberger SE(1), Saito Y, Giller T, Hintermann E, Tanner H, JÃ¤ggin V, Zumsteg 
U, Civelli O, Eberle AN.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Endocrinology, Department of Research (ZLF), University 
Hospital and University Children's Hospital, Basel, Switzerland.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a neuropeptide occurring in all 
vertebrates and some invertebrates and is now known to stimulate pigment 
aggregation in teleost melanophores and food-intake in mammals. Whereas the two 
MCH receptor subtypes hitherto cloned, MCH-R1 and MCH-R2, are thought to mediate 
mainly the central effects of MCH, the MCH-R on pigment cells has not yet been 
identified, although in some studies MCH-R1 was reported to be expressed by 
human melanocytes and melanoma cells. Here we present data of a 
structure-activity study in which 12 MCH peptides were tested on rat MCH-R1 and 
mouse B16 melanoma cell MCH-R, by comparing receptor binding affinities and 
biological activities. For receptor binding analysis with HEK-293 cells 
expressing rat MCH-R1 (SLC-1), the radioligand was [125I]-[Tyr13]-MCH with the 
natural sequence. For B16 cells (F1 and G4F sublines) expressing B16 MCH-R, the 
analog [125I]-[D-Phe13, Tyr19]-MCH served as radioligand. The bioassay used for 
MCH-R1 was intracellular Ca2+ mobilization quantified with the FLIPR instrument, 
whereas for B16 MCH-R the signal determined was MAP kinase activation. Our data 
show that some of the peptides displayed a similar relative increase or decrease 
of potency in both cell types tested. For example, linear MCH with Ser residues 
at positions 7 and 16 was almost inactive whereas a slight increase in 
side-chain hydrophilicity at residues 4 and 8, or truncation of MCH at the 
N-terminus by two residues hardly changed binding affinity or bioactivity. On 
the other hand, salmonic MCH which also lacks the first two residues of the 
mammalian sequence but in addition has different residues at positions 4, 5, 9, 
and 18 exhibited a 5- to 10-fold lower binding activity than MCH in both cell 
systems. A striking difference in ligand recognition between MCH-R1 and B16 
MCH-R was however observed with modifications at position 13 of MCH: whereas 
L-Phe13 in [Phe13, Tyr19]-MCH was well tolerated by both MCH-R1 and B16 MCH-R, 
change of configuration to D-Phe13 in [D-Phe13, Tyr19]-MCH or [D-Phe13]-MCH led 
to a complete loss of biological activity and to a 5- to 10-fold lower binding 
activity with MCH-R1. By contrast, the D-Phe13 residue increased the affinity of 
[D-Phe13, Tyr19]-MCH to B16 MCH-R about 10-fold and elicited MAP kinase 
activation as observed with [Phe13, Tyr19]-MCH or MCH. These data demonstrate 
that ligand recognition by B16 MCH-R differs from that of MCH-R1 in several 
respects, indicating that the B16 MCH-R represents an MCH-R subtype different 
from MCH-R1.

DOI: 10.1081/rrs-120018761
PMID: 12680590 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
