1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Aug 19;100(17):10085-90. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1633636100. Epub 2003 Aug 1.

Melanin-concentrating hormone is a critical mediator of the leptin-deficient 
phenotype.

Segal-Lieberman G(1), Bradley RL, Kokkotou E, Carlson M, Trombly DJ, Wang X, 
Bates S, Myers MG Jr, Flier JS, Maratos-Flier E.

Author information:
(1)Research Division, Joslin Diabetes Center, 1 Joslin Place, Boston, MA 02215, 
USA.

Energy homeostasis is regulated by a complex network involving peripheral and 
central signals that determine food intake and energy expenditure. 
Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) plays an essential role in this process. 
Animals treated with MCH develop hyperphagia and obesity. Ablation of the 
prepro-MCH gene leads to a lean phenotype, as does ablation of the rodent MCH 
receptor, MCHR-1. MCH is overexpressed in the leptin-deficient ob/ob mouse, and 
we hypothesized that ablation of MCH in this animal would lead to attenuation of 
its obese phenotype. Compared with ob/ob animals, mice lacking both leptin and 
MCH (double null) had a dramatic reduction in body fat. Surprisingly, the 
hyperphagia of the ob/ob mouse was unaffected. Instead, leanness was secondary 
to a marked increase in energy expenditure resulting from both increased resting 
energy expenditure and locomotor activity. Furthermore, double-null mice showed 
improvements in other parameters impaired in ob/ob mice. Compared with ob/ob 
mice, double-null animals had increased basal body temperature, improved 
response to cold exposure, lower plasma glucocorticoid levels, improved glucose 
tolerance, and reduced expression of stearoyl-CoA desaturase 1 (SCD-1). These 
results highlight the importance of MCH in integration of energy homeostasis 
downstream of leptin and, in particular, the role of MCH in regulation of energy 
expenditure.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1633636100
PMCID: PMC187774
PMID: 12897241 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
