1. Anal Biochem. 2004 May 15;328(2):187-95. doi: 10.1016/j.ab.2004.01.017.

Europium-labeled melanin-concentrating hormone analogues: ligands for measuring 
binding to melanin-concentrating hormone receptors 1 and 2.

Gao X(1), Hsu CK, Heinz LJ, Morin J, Shi Y, Shukla NK, Smiley DL, Xu J, Zhong B, 
Slieker LJ.

Author information:
(1)Endocrine Discovery Research, Lilly Research Laboratories, Eli Lilly and Co., 
DC 0545, Indianapolis, IN 46285, USA.

We investigated the use of Eu3+ chelate-labeled analogues of 
melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) as ligands for both human MCH receptors 
(MCHR1 and MCHR2). The analogues employed were Ala17 MCH, S36057 
(Y-ADO-RC*MLGRVFRPC*W, where ADO=8-amino-3,6-dioxyoctanoyl and *=disulfide 
bond), and R2P (RC*MLGRVFRPC*Y-NH2). The peptides were readily labeled on the 
alpha-amino residue with the Eu3+ chelate of 
N1-(p-isothiocyanatobenzyl)-diethylenetriamine-N1,N2,N3,N3-tetraacetic acid and 
then purified by reverse-phase fast-performance liquid chromatography at neutral 
pH to maintain Eu3+ chelation. Both labeled Ala17 MCH and S36057 had high 
affinity for MCHR1 ( Kd = 0.37 and 0.059nM, respectively) while Eu3+ -labeled 
S36057 and R2P had high affinity for MCHR2 ( Kd = 0.16 and 0.10nM, 
respectively). Labeled Ala17 MCH had little demonstrable binding affinity for 
MCHR2. Eu3+ -labeled S36057 and R2P were full agonists at MCHR1 when assessed by 
measurement of agonist-stimulated GTPgamma(35)S binding. Competition binding 
experiments with both MCHR isoforms, a series of previously characterized 
alanine scan MCH analogues, and a recently identified nonpeptide MCHR1-selective 
antagonist T-226296 confirmed the expected receptor selectivity. These studies 
further extend the utility of Eu3+ chelate time-resolved fluorescence for the 
development of high-sensitivity, nonradioactive receptor binding assays and 
demonstrate the need to select the optimal ligand for labeling.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ab.2004.01.017
PMID: 15113696 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
