1. Endocrinology. 2004 Aug;145(8):3712-23. doi: 10.1210/en.2003-1638. Epub 2004
Apr  29.

The basic residues in the membrane-proximal C-terminal tail of the rat 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 are required for receptor function.

Tetsuka M(1), Saito Y, Imai K, Doi H, Maruyama K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Saitama Medical School, Iruma-gun, Saitama 
350-0492, Japan.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a hypothalamic neuropeptide that plays a 
key role in food intake. It acts through two G protein-coupled receptors 
(GPCRs), MCH1R and MCH2R, of which MCH1R is the primary regulator of food 
intake. We have previously reported that N-linked glycosylation of the 
extracellular domain of MCH1R is necessary for cell surface expression and 
signal transduction. We now report a role for the rat MCH1R C-terminal region. 
We constructed serial C-terminal truncation mutants and determined the resulting 
changes in protein expression, cell surface expression, ligand binding, and 
MCH-stimulated calcium influx. By analyzing two mutants, deltaT317 (deletion of 
36 C-terminal amino acids) and deltaR321 (deletion of 32 C-terminal amino 
acids), we found that the region between Phe(318) and Arg(321)) was responsible 
for signal transduction. A more detailed analysis was performed with single or 
multiple residue mutations. Single mutations of Arg(319), Lys(320), or Arg(321) 
exhibited a decrease in the cell surface expression, whereas mutations of either 
Arg(319) or Lys(320), but not Arg(321), showed a significant reduction in the 
calcium influx. Furthermore, simultaneous mutations of Arg(319) and Lys(320) 
produced a pronounced decrease in the efficacy of calcium influx stimulation 
compared with single mutations. A computational analysis revealed a dibasic 
amino acid motif that is conserved among many class 1 GPCRs and may be part of 
the amphiphilic cytoplasmic helix 8 (an eight-cytoplasmic helix). Our results 
therefore provide new insights into the role of the putative helix 8 in the 
regulation of GPCR function.

DOI: 10.1210/en.2003-1638
PMID: 15117878 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
