1. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2004 Oct;287(4):R749-58. doi: 
10.1152/ajpregu.00134.2004. Epub 2004 May 6.

Mice lacking melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 demonstrate increased 
heart rate associated with altered autonomic activity.

Astrand A(1), Bohlooly-Y M, Larsdotter S, Mahlapuu M, Andersén H, Tornell J, 
Ohlsson C, Snaith M, Morgan DG.

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Integrative Pharmacology, AstraZeneca R&D Mölndal, S-431 83 Mölndal, 
Sweden.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) plays an important role in energy balance. 
The current studies were carried out on a new line of mice lacking the rodent 
MCH receptor (MCHR1(-/-) mice). These mice confirmed the previously reported 
lean phenotype characterized by increased energy expenditure and modestly 
increased caloric intake. Because MCH is expressed in the lateral hypothalamic 
area, which also has an important role in the regulation of the autonomic 
nervous system, heart rate and blood pressure were measured by a telemetric 
method to investigate whether the increased energy expenditure in these mice 
might be due to altered autonomic nervous system activity. Male MCHR1(-/-) mice 
demonstrated a significantly increased heart rate [24-h period: wild type 495 
+/- 4 vs. MCHR1(-/-) 561 +/- 8 beats/min (P < 0.001); dark phase: wild type 506 
+/- 8 vs. MCHR1(-/-) 582 +/- 9 beats/min (P < 0.001); light phase: wild type 484 
+/- 13 vs. MCHR1(-/-) 539 +/- 9 beats/min (P < 0.005)] with no significant 
difference in mean arterial pressure [wild type 110 +/- 0.3 vs. MCHR1(-/-) 113 
+/- 0.4 mmHg (P > 0.05)]. Locomotor activity and core body temperature were 
higher in the MCHR1(-/-) mice during the dark phase only and thus temporally 
dissociated from heart rate differences. On fasting, wild-type animals rapidly 
downregulated body temperature and heart rate. MCHR1(-/-) mice displayed a 
distinct delay in the onset of this downregulation. To investigate the mechanism 
underlying these differences, autonomic blockade experiments were carried out. 
Administration of the adrenergic antagonist metoprolol completely reversed the 
tachycardia seen in MCHR1(-/-) mice, suggesting an increased sympathetic tone.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpregu.00134.2004
PMID: 15130877 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
