1. Obes Res. 2004 May;12(5):743-9. doi: 10.1038/oby.2004.89.

Melanin-concentrating hormone receptor mutations and human obesity: functional 
analysis.

Gibson WT(1), Pissios P, Trombly DJ, Luan J, Keogh J, Wareham NJ, Maratos-Flier 
E, O'Rahilly S, Farooqi IS.

Author information:
(1)University Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Cambridge Institute of 
medical Research, Cambridge United Kingdom.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH), a neuropeptide highly expressed in the 
lateral hypothalamus, has an important role in the regulation of energy balance 
and body weight in rodents. We examined whether mutations in the two known MCH 
receptors might be associated with obesity-related phenotypes in humans. Among 
106 subjects with severe early onset obesity and a history of hyperphagia, we 
found two missense variants in MCHR1: Y181H and R248Q. Neither of these was 
found in 192 normal weight controls. R248Q cosegregated with obesity across two 
generations; family data were unavailable for Y181H. When expressed in HEK293 
cells, R248Q showed no evidence of constitutive activation or ligand 
hypersensitivity for extracellular signal-regulated kinase phosphorylation. In 
addition, R248Q showed no enhanced suppression of cAMP generation. Two common 
single-nucleotide polymorphisms were found to be in linkage disequilibrium: 
g.-114A>G and c.39C>T. No association between either of these single-nucleotide 
polymorphisms and obesity-related phenotypes was found among a population cohort 
of 541 whites. Only two rare noncoding variants were found in MCHR2. In 
conclusion, mutations in the MCH receptors are not commonly found in humans with 
severe early onset obesity. Clarification of the relationship of these variants 
to obesity must await study in other populations and/or in genetically modified 
mice.

Copyright 2004 NAASO

DOI: 10.1038/oby.2004.89
PMID: 15166293 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
