1. Proteins. 2004 Aug 15;56(3):430-48. doi: 10.1002/prot.20125.

Structural features of the inactive and active states of the 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptors: insights from molecular simulations.

Vitale RM(1), Pedone C, De Benedetti PG, Fanelli F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, 
Italy.

Comparative molecular dynamics simulations of both subtypes 1 and 2 of the 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptor (MCHR1 and MCHR2, respectively) in their 
free and hormone-bound forms have been carried out. The hormone has been used in 
its full-length and truncated forms, as well as in 16 mutated forms. Moreover, 
MCHR1 has been simulated in complex with T-226296, a novel orally active and 
selective antagonist. The comparative analysis of an extended number of receptor 
configurations suggests that the differences between inactive (i.e., free and 
antagonist-bound) and active (i.e., agonist-bound) states of MCHRs involve the 
receptor portions close to the E/DRY and NPxxY motifs, with prominence to the 
cytosolic extensions of helices 2, 3, 6, and 7. In fact, the active forms of 
these receptors share the release of selected intramolecular interactions found 
in the inactive forms, such as that between R3.50 of the E/DRY motif and D2.40, 
and that between Y7.53 of the NPxxY motif and F7.60. Another feature of the 
active forms of both MCHRs is the approach of "helix 8" to the cytosolic 
extension of helix 3. These features of the active forms are concurrent with the 
opening of a cleft at the cytosolic end of the helix bundle. For both MCHRs, the 
agonist-induced chemical information transfer from the extracellular to the 
cytosolic domains is mediated by a cluster of aromatic amino acids in helix 6, 
following the ligand interaction with selected amino acids in the extracellular 
half of the receptor.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/prot.20125
PMID: 15229878 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
