1. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2004 Sep 28;128(2):150-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.molbrainres.2004.06.010.

Increases in melanin-concentrating hormone and MCH receptor levels in the 
hypothalamus of dietary-obese rats.

Elliott JC(1), Harrold JA, Brodin P, Enquist K, BÃ¤ckman A, BystrÃ¶m M, Lindgren 
K, King P, Williams G.

Author information:
(1)Neuroendocrine and Obesity Biology Unit, Department of Medicine, Liverpool 
University, 4th Floor U.C.D., Duncan Building, Daulby Street, Liverpool, UK.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a hypothalamic neuropeptide that 
stimulates feeding and increases body weight in rodents. We studied the role of 
the system in energy homeostasis and its regulation by the satiety signals, 
leptin and insulin. We used real-time PCR to measure the hypothalamic expression 
of MCH and its receptor (MCHR1) in two contrasting models of altered nutritional 
status, namely, obesity induced by 8 weeks' voluntary overeating and food 
restriction for 10 days. Diet-fed rats were stratified according to final total 
fat-pad mass into a 'high fat gain' group (HG) and 'low fat gain' group (LG). 
MCH mRNA levels were increased by 31% (p>0.05) and 49% (p<0.05) in the LG and 
HG, respectively, compared with controls. MCHR1 mRNA levels rose by 118% in the 
LG (p<0.01) and 85% in the HG (p<0.01). There were significant positive 
correlations (p<0.05) between plasma leptin concentration and both MCH and MCHR1 
mRNA levels, and between plasma insulin and MCHR1 expression. A positive 
correlation was also observed between MCH and MCHR1 mRNA levels (p<0.05). 
Food-restricted rats showed no significant alterations in the levels of either 
MCH mRNA or MCHR1 mRNA. In a second experiment, we measured MCH peptide levels 
in five discrete hypothalamic areas of dietary-obese rats. MCH concentrations 
were significantly increased in the arcuate nuclei of the HG (p<0.05) and the 
paraventricular nuclei of both the LG (p<0.05) and HG (p<0.05), compared with 
their lean counterparts. These results suggest that the MCH system becomes more 
active in dietary obesity and could be involved in enhancing appetite for 
palatable food. The possibility that MCH and MCHR1 expression are positively 
regulated by leptin and insulin, which normally inhibit feeding, is a putative 
explanation for how appetite for palatable food is able to override mechanisms 
that prevent the development of obesity.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molbrainres.2004.06.010
PMID: 15363890 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
