1. Peptides. 2004 Oct;25(10):1597-604. doi: 10.1016/j.peptides.2004.03.026.

Properties of rat melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 internalization.

Saito Y(1), Tetsuka M, Li Y, Kurose H, Maruyama K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Saitama Medical School, Saitama 390-0452, Japan. 
yumisait@saitama-med.ac.jp

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a neuropeptide that plays an important 
role in several physiological processes. It activates two G protein-coupled 
receptors (GPCRs), MCH1R and MCH2R, of which MCH1R seems to be a key regulator 
of food intake. By using HEK293T cells stably transfected with Flag-tagged rat 
MCH1R, we investigated the mechanism underlying the MCH-induced internalization 
pathway, which is important for the desensitization or regulation of the 
receptor response. Quantitative analysis by flow cytometry indicated that the 
rate of MCH1R internalization progressed in a rapid and time-dependent manner 
during the first 30 min, and was partly inhibited by pretreatment with the 
selective protein kinase C (PKC) inhibitor Go6850. Overexpression of 
dominant-negative beta-arrestin-2 (284-409) or dynamin I-K44A significantly 
prevented MCH-induced internalization of MCH1R, while overexpression of 
dominant-negative beta-arrestin-1-V53D had no effect. A triple-substituted 
mutant at Thr317, Ser325 and Thr342 to Ala residue in the C-terminus 
significantly prevented MCH-induced receptor internalization. Similar extents of 
internalization prevention were noted with the deletion mutants DeltaThr342 and 
DeltaGlu346, lacking 11 and 7 residues in the C-terminal tail, respectively. Our 
data suggest that MCH1R undergoes rapid MCH-induced internalization through a 
PKC-, beta-arrestin-2- and dynamin I-dependent pathway and that a portion of the 
C-terminal tail plays an important role in the internalization process.

DOI: 10.1016/j.peptides.2004.03.026
PMID: 15476926 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
