1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Mar 4;280(9):8208-20. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M405215200. Epub 2004
 Dec 6.

Periplakin interferes with G protein activation by the melanin-concentrating 
hormone receptor-1 by binding to the proximal segment of the receptor C-terminal 
tail.

Murdoch H(1), Feng GJ, BÃ¤chner D, Ormiston L, White JH, Richter D, Milligan G.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Pharmacology Group, Division of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 
Institute of Biomedical and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 
8QQ, Scotland, United Kingdom.

In mice genetic ablation of expression of either melanin-concentrating hormone 
or the melanin-concentrating hormone-1 receptor results in alterations in energy 
metabolism and a lean phenotype. There is thus great interest in the function 
and regulation of this receptor. Using the yeast two-hybrid system we identified 
an interaction of the actin- and intermediate filament-binding protein 
periplakin with the intracellular C-terminal tail of the melanin-concentrating 
hormone-1 receptor. Direct association of these proteins was verified in 
pull-down and coimmunoprecipitation experiments. Truncations and internal 
deletions delineated the site of interaction to a group of 11 amino acids 
proximal to transmembrane helix VII, which was distinct from the binding site 
for the melanin-concentrating hormone-1 receptor-interacting zinc finger 
protein. Immunohistochemistry demonstrated coexpression of periplakin with 
melanin-concentrating hormone-1 receptor in specific cells of the piriform 
cortex, amygdala, and other structures of the adult mouse brain. Coexpression of 
the melanin-concentrating hormone-1 receptor with periplakin in human embryonic 
kidney 293 cells did not prevent agonist-mediated internalization of the 
receptor but did interfere with binding of (35)S-labeled guanosine 
5'-3-O-(thio)triphosphate ([(35)S]GTPgammaS) to the G protein Galpha(o1) and the 
elevation of [Ca(2+)](i). Coexpression of the receptor with the interacting zinc 
finger protein did not modulate receptor internalization or G protein 
activation. The interaction of periplakin with receptors was selective. 
Coexpression of periplakin with the IP prostanoid receptor did not result in 
coimmunoprecipitation nor interfere with agonist-mediated binding of 
[(35)S]GTPgammaS to the G protein Galpha(s). Periplakin is the first protein 
described to modify the capacity of the melanin-concentrating hormone-1 receptor 
to initiate signal transduction.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M405215200
PMID: 15590649 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
