1. J Neurosci. 2005 Jan 26;25(4):914-22. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4079-04.2005.

Mesolimbic dopamine super-sensitivity in melanin-concentrating hormone-1 
receptor-deficient mice.

Smith DG(1), Tzavara ET, Shaw J, Luecke S, Wade M, Davis R, Salhoff C, Nomikos 
GG, Gehlert DR.

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Discovery Research, Lilly Research Laboratories, Eli Lilly and 
Company, Indianapolis, Indiana 46285, USA. dgsmith@lilly.com

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) neurons and MCH-1 receptors (MCH1r) densely 
populate mesolimbic dopaminergic brain regions such as the nucleus accumbens 
(NAc). The regulation of dopamine by MCH1r was suggested to be an important 
mechanism underlying the hyperactive phenotype of MCH1r knock-out (ko) mice. 
However, MCH1r modulation of monoamine neurotransmission has yet to be examined. 
We tested whether dopamine, norepinephrine, and serotonin function is 
dysregulated in MCH1r ko and wild-type (wt) mice. MCH1r ko mice exhibited robust 
hyperactivity in a novel or familiar environment and were super-sensitive to the 
locomotor activating effects of d-amphetamine and the D1 agonist 
2,3,4,5-tetrahydro-7,8-dihydroxy-1-phenyl-1H-3-benazepine HCl. The D2 agonist, 
quinpirole, decreased locomotion similarly in both ko and wt mice. Tissue 
contents of dopamine within the NAc and caudate-putamen were not significantly 
different in ko compared with wt mice. Basal and amphetamine-evoked NAc 
dopamine, norepinephrine, and serotonin efflux, as measured using in vivo 
microdialysis, were not significantly different between genotypes. In contrast, 
D1-like and D2-like receptor binding were significantly higher within the 
olfactory tubercle, ventral tegmental area, and NAc core and shell of ko mice. 
Norepinephrine transporter (NET) binding was significantly elevated within the 
NAc shell and globus pallidus of ko mice, whereas serotonin transporter binding 
was decreased in the NAc shell. Thus, deletion of MCH1r results in an 
upregulation of mesolimbic dopamine receptors and NET, indicating that MCH1r may 
negatively modulate mesolimbic monoamine function. MCH1r may be an important 
therapeutic target for neuropsychiatric disorders involving dysregulation of 
limbic monoamine systems.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4079-04.2005
PMCID: PMC6725636
PMID: 15673672 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
