1. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2005 May;313(2):831-9. doi: 10.1124/jpet.104.081711.
Epub  2005 Jan 26.

Anxiolytic- and antidepressant-like profile of ATC0065 and ATC0175: nonpeptidic 
and orally active melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 antagonists.

Chaki S(1), Funakoshi T, Hirota-Okuno S, Nishiguchi M, Shimazaki T, Iijima M, 
Grottick AJ, Kanuma K, Omodera K, Sekiguchi Y, Okuyama S, Tran TA, Semple G, 
Thomsen W.

Author information:
(1)Taisho Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Saitama, Japan. s.chaki@po.rd.taisho.co.jp

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a cyclic peptide produced in the lateral 
hypothalamus. It has been implicated in a number of physiological processes 
including feeding behavior, energy balance, and the regulation of emotional 
states. Here, we report in vitro and in vivo profiles of ATC0065 
[N(2)-[cis-4-({2-[4-bromo-2-(trifluoromethoxy)phenyl]ethyl}amino)cyclohexyl]-N(4), 
N(4)-dimethylquinazoline-2,4-diamine dihydrochloride] and ATC0175 
[N-(cis-4-{[4-(dimethylamino)quinazolin-2-yl]amino}cyclohexyl)-3,4-difluorobenzamide 
hydrochloride], newly synthesized MCH receptor 1 (MCHR1) antagonists. Both 
ATC0065 and ATC0175 had high affinities for human MCHR1 with IC(50) values of 
15.7 +/- 1.95 and 7.23 +/- 0.59 nM, respectively. Both ATC0065 (IC(50) = 21.4 
+/- 1.57 nM) and ATC0175 (IC(50) = 13.5 +/- 0.78 nM) showed potent antagonist 
activities at MCHR1, as assessed by MCH-increased guanosine 
5'-O-(3-[(35)S]thio)phosphate ([(35)S]GTPgammaS) binding to human MCHR1. Oral 
administration of ATC0065 (3-30 mg/kg) or ATC0175 (1-10 mg/kg) significantly 
reduced immobility time in the forced swimming test in rats, indicating 
antidepressant-like effects. Both ATC0065 and ATC0175 significantly reversed 
swim stress-induced anxiety in the elevated plus-maze test in rats and 
stress-induced hyperthermia in mice. ATC0175 significantly increased social 
interaction between unfamiliar rats and reduced separation-induced vocalizations 
in guinea pig pups, indicating anxiolytic potential. In contrast, ATC0065 and 
ATC0175 did not affect spontaneous locomotor activity or rotarod performance in 
rats. These findings indicate that ATC0065 and ATC0175 are potent and orally 
active MCHR1 antagonists with anxiolytic and antidepressant activity in rodents.

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.104.081711
PMID: 15677346 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
