1. Endocrinology. 2005 Jul;146(7):3080-6. doi: 10.1210/en.2004-1150. Epub 2005
Apr  7.

Antiobesity effect of a melanin-concentrating hormone 1 receptor antagonist in 
diet-induced obese mice.

Mashiko S(1), Ishihara A, Gomori A, Moriya R, Ito M, Iwaasa H, Matsuda M, Feng 
Y, Shen Z, Marsh DJ, Bednarek MA, MacNeil DJ, Kanatani A.

Author information:
(1)Tsukuba Research Institute, Banyu Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Okubo 3, Tsukuba 
300-2611, Japan.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a cyclic orexigenic peptide expressed in 
the lateral hypothalamus, which plays an important role in regulating energy 
balance. To elucidate the physiological role of MCH in obesity development, the 
present study examined the effect of a selective MCH1 receptor (MCH1R) 
antagonist in the diet-induced obesity mouse model. The MCH1R antagonist has 
high affinity and selectivity for MCH-1R and potently inhibits 
intracerebroventricularly injected MCH-induced food intake in Sprague Dawley 
rats. Chronic intracerebroventricular infusion of the MCH1R antagonist (7.5 
microg/d) completely suppressed body weight gain in diet-induced obese mice 
during the treatment periods and significantly decreased cumulative food intake, 
by 14%. Carcass analysis showed that the MCH1R antagonist resulted in a 
selective decrease of body fat in the diet-induced obese mice. In addition, the 
MCH1R antagonist ameliorated the obesity-related hypercholesterolemia, 
hyperinsulinemia, hyperglycemia, and hyperleptinemia. These results indicate 
that MCH has a major role in the development of diet-induced obesity in mice and 
that a MCH1R antagonist might be a useful candidate as an antiobesity agent.

DOI: 10.1210/en.2004-1150
PMID: 15817671 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
