1. Brain Res. 2005 Apr 18;1041(2):117-24. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2004.11.066.

Melanin concentrating hormone (MCH): a novel neural pathway for regulation of 
GnRH neurons.

Williamson-Hughes PS(1), Grove KL, Smith MS.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neuroscience, Oregon National Primate Research Center, Oregon 
Health and Science University, Beaverton, OR 97006, USA.

The link between the state of energy balance and reproductive function is well 
known. Thus, signals denoting negative energy balance and the accompanying 
hyperphagic drive are likely to be factors in the suppression of gonadotropin 
releasing hormone (GnRH) activity. We have previously found that 
appetite-regulating systems, such as neuropeptide Y (NPY) in the arcuate nucleus 
(ARH) and orexin in the lateral hypothalamic area (LHA), send fiber projections 
that come in close apposition with GnRH neurons. Furthermore, the appropriate 
receptors, NPY Y5 and OR-1, respectively, are coexpressed on GnRH neurons, 
providing neuroanatomical evidence for a direct link between the NPY and orexin 
systems and GnRH neurons. Therefore, these orexigenic neuropeptide systems are 
potential candidates that convey information about energy balance to GnRH 
neurons. The current studies focused on melanin concentrating hormone (MCH), 
another orexigenic neuropeptide system located in the LHA that is sensitive to 
energy balance. The results showed that MCH fiber projections came in close 
apposition with approximately 85-90% of GnRH cell bodies throughout the preoptic 
area and anterior hypothalamic area in the rat. In addition, the MCH receptor 
(MCHR1) was coexpressed on about 50-55% of GnRH neurons. These findings present 
evidence for a possible direct neuroanatomical pathway by which MCH may play a 
role in the regulation of GnRH neuronal function. Thus, MCH is another potential 
signal that may serve to integrate energy balance and reproductive function.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2004.11.066
PMID: 15829220 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
