1. Endocrinology. 2005 Aug;146(8):3452-62. doi: 10.1210/en.2005-0115. Epub 2005
May  12.

Arginine residue 155 in the second intracellular loop plays a critical role in 
rat melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 activation.

Saito Y(1), Tetsuka M, Saito S, Imai K, Yoshikawa A, Doi H, Maruyama K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Saitama Medical School, 38 Moro-Hongo, 
Moroyama-cho, Iruma-gun, Saitama 350-0492, Japan. yumisait@saitama-med.ac.jp

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) receptor 1 (MCH1R) is a class A G 
protein-coupled receptor. The MCH system has been linked to a variety of 
physiological functions, including the regulation of feeding and energy 
metabolism. We recently reported the importance of a dibasic motif in the 
membrane-proximal C-terminal region for MCH1R function. Here we reveal that an 
Arg residue in intracellular loop 2 of MCH1R plays a critical role in receptor 
function. We analyzed the roles of two distinct motifs, BBXXB and BXBB (in which 
B is a basic residue and X is a nonbasic residue), located in the three 
intracellular loops of MCH1R. Triple-substitution mutants of intracellular loops 
1 and 3 could still activate calcium mobilization, albeit with lower efficacy or 
potency. However, mutations in intracellular loop 2 led to a complete loss of 
induction of signal transduction without changing the high affinity constant 
(Kd) value. By analyzing a series of single-substitution mutants, a point 
mutation of Arg155 in intracellular loop 2 was found to be responsible for the 
signaling pathway elicited by MCH. In addition, substitution at positions 
corresponding to Arg155 in human MCH receptor 2 and rat somatostatin receptor 2 
also markedly abolished their ligand-induced signaling capacities, indicating 
that this Arg is a recognition determinant in several G protein-coupled 
receptors.

DOI: 10.1210/en.2005-0115
PMID: 15890773 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
