1. Mol Endocrinol. 2005 Oct;19(10):2579-90. doi: 10.1210/me.2004-0301. Epub 2005 
May 31.

A point mutation in the human melanin concentrating hormone receptor 1 reveals 
an important domain for cellular trafficking.

Fan J(1), Perry SJ, Gao Y, Schwarz DA, Maki RA.

Author information:
(1)Neurocrine Biosciences, Inc., 12790 El Camino Real, San Diego, California 
92113, USA.

G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are heptahelical integral membrane proteins 
that require cell surface expression to elicit their effects. The lack of 
appropriate expression of GPCRs may be the underlying cause of a number of 
inherited disorders. There is evidence that newly synthesized GPCRs must attain 
a specific conformation for their correct trafficking to the cell surface. In 
this study, we show that a single point mutation in human melanin-concentrating 
hormone receptor (hMCHR1) at position 255 (T255A), which is located at the 
junction of intracellular loop 3 and transmembrane domain 6, reduces the hMCHR1 
cell surface expression level to 20% of that observed for the wild-type 
receptor. Most of these mutant receptors are located intracellularly, as opposed 
to the wild-type receptor, which is located primarily on the cell surface. 
Immunoprecipitation experiments show that hMCHR1-T255A has reduced glycosylation 
compared with the wild-type receptor and is associated with the chaperone 
protein, calnexin, and it colocalizes in the endoplasmic reticulum with 
KDEL-containing proteins. We also demonstrate that a cell-permeable small 
molecule antagonist of hMCHR1 can function as a pharmacological chaperone to 
restore cell surface expression of this and other MCHR1 mutants to wild-type 
levels. Once rescued, the T255A mutant couples to Gq proteins as efficiently as 
the wild-type receptor. These data suggest that this single mutation produces an 
hMCHR1 that folds incorrectly, resulting in its retention in the endoplasmic 
reticulum, but once rescued to the cell surface can still function normally.

DOI: 10.1210/me.2004-0301
PMID: 15928315 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
