1. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2005 Sep 13;139(1):31-41. doi: 
10.1016/j.molbrainres.2005.05.005.

Immunohistochemical distribution of MIZIP and its co-expression with the 
Melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 in the adult rodent brain.

Francke F(1), Richter D, BÃ¤chner D.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Cell Biochemistry and Clinical Neurobiology, University 
Hospital Hamburg-Eppendorf, D-20246 Hamburg, Germany.

We have recently identified a Melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 
interacting zinc-finger protein (MIZIP) from a human brain cDNA library. Here, 
we report the generation of a specific antibody against MIZIP and its 
distribution in rodent tissues using immunoblotting and immunohistochemical 
techniques. MIZIP was detected as a 27 kDa protein in brain, liver, and skeletal 
muscle, and to a lower extend, in lung, testis, and heart. Subcellular 
fractionation of adult mouse brain revealed the presence of MIZIP and MCHR1 in 
the cytoplasmic, membrane, and synaptosomal fraction, but not in a postsynaptic 
density preparation. In cultured rat, embryonic hippocampal neurons MIZIP is 
somatodendritically localized. In the adult rodent brain, MIZIP is widely 
distributed. High levels of expression were detected in brain regions involved 
in olfaction, feeding behavior, sensorimotor integration, and learning and 
memory, for example, the olfactory bulb, the olfactory tubercle, the caudate 
putamen, the thalamus and hypothalamus, the nucleus accumbens, the cerebral 
cortex, the hippocampus formation, and the cerebellum. Co-expression of MIZIP 
and MCHR1 was observed, for example, in pyramidal neurons of the cerebral cortex 
and hippocampus, in neurons of the olivary nucleus, lateral hypothalamus, 
nucleus accumbens, caudate putamen, pontine, and mesencephalic trigeminal 
nucleus. However, there are also differences in the expression patterns, for 
example, high expression of MCHR1 was detected in the lateral habenula, but no 
expression of MIZIP. These data support the notion that MIZIP might interact 
with MCHR1 in a cell type specific manner in vivo, suggesting a role in the 
regulation of MCH signalling in distinct regions of the mammalian brain.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molbrainres.2005.05.005
PMID: 15950311 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
