1. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2006 Jan;31(1):112-20. doi: 10.1038/sj.npp.1300805.

Genetic inactivation of melanin-concentrating hormone receptor subtype 1 (MCHR1) 
in mice exerts anxiolytic-like behavioral effects.

Roy M(1), David NK, Danao JV, Baribault H, Tian H, Giorgetti M.

Author information:
(1)Amgen Inc., South San Francisco, CA, USA. roym@stanfordalumni.org

The biological effects of the melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) are mediated 
by the melanin concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1) in mice. This receptor 
is enriched in brain areas that are involved in the modulation of mood and 
affect, suggesting that MCH-dependent signaling may influence neurobiological 
mechanisms underlying fear and anxiety processes. To test this, we have 
generated mice lacking functional MCHR1 and characterized phenotypic traits 
using a number of behavioral tests. Mice carrying a null mutation of the MCHR1 
gene display anxiolytic-like behavior across a battery different behavioral 
paradigms commonly used to assess fear and anxiety responses in rodents: open 
field, elevated plus maze, social interaction, and stress-induced hyperthermia. 
The brain serotonin (5-HT) system is central to the control of mood- and 
anxiety-related processes. To examine the impact of MCHR1 receptor deletion on 
5-HT neurotransmission, we used in vivo microdialysis in freely moving knockout 
and wild-type mice. Baseline dialysate 5-HT levels were significantly lower in 
MCHR1 knockout mice as compared with wild-type controls (9.53+/-0.24 fmol for 
wild types vs 6.91+/-0.36 fmol for knockouts) in the prefrontal cortex (PFC), 
one of the main target structures of the serotonergic system and one that is 
highly associated with the control of emotional processes. Moreover, forced swim 
increased 5-HT efflux in the PFC of wild-type but not MCHR1 knockout mice. In 
summary, we show that MCHR1 can modulate stress- and anxiety-like behaviors and 
suggest that this may be due to changes in serotonergic transmission in 
forebrain regions.

Neuropsychopharmacology (2006) 31, 112-120. doi:10.1038/sj.npp.1300805; 
published online 29 June 2005.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.npp.1300805
PMID: 15988472 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
