1. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2006 Jun;31(6):1135-45. doi: 10.1038/sj.npp.1300913.

Melanin-concentrating hormone-1 receptor modulates neuroendocrine, behavioral, 
and corticolimbic neurochemical stress responses in mice.

Smith DG(1), Davis RJ, Rorick-Kehn L, Morin M, Witkin JM, McKinzie DL, Nomikos 
GG, Gehlert DR.

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Discovery Research, Lilly Research Laboratories, Eli Lilly and 
Company, Indianapolis, IN 46285, USA. dgs@lundbeck.com

Repeated exposure to stressful conditions is linked to the etiology of affective 
disorders. The melanin-concentrating hormone-1 receptor (MCHR1) may be a novel 
mechanism that is involved in the modulation of stress responses and affective 
states. The role of MCHR1 in neuroendocrine, behavioral, and neurochemical 
stress, and anxiety-related responses was examined by monitoring the effects of 
melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) and the selective MCHR1 antagonist, GW3430, 
in inbred C57Bl/6NTac and MCHR1-knockout (KO) and wild-type (WT) mice. 
Intracerebroventricular injection of MCH increased plasma corticosterone, and 
produced anxiety-related responses in the elevated plus maze. The selective 
MCHR1 antagonist, GW3430, blocked the neuroendocrine and behavioral effects of 
MCH and produced anxiolytic-like effects by itself in animal models of anxiety. 
Moreover, KO mice had an anxiolytic-like phenotype in behavioral models of 
anxiety, and GW3430 had anxiolytic-like effects in WT, but not KO mice. Lastly, 
stressor-evoked acetylcholine release within the prefrontal cortex of inbred and 
WT mice, but not KO mice, was blocked by GW3430. We show that MCH elicits 
anxiety-like responses and that the effects of a selective MCHR1 antagonist and 
the phenotype of KO mice are consistent with anxiolytic-like action. Distinct 
behavioral, physiological, and neurochemical stress, and anxiety-related 
responses were selectively modulated by the MCHR1, and these actions may involve 
corticolimbic regulation of stress responsivity and anxiety.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.npp.1300913
PMID: 16205780 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
