1. J Neuroendocrinol. 2006 Mar;18(3):157-67. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2826.2005.01397.x.

Evidence for a stimulatory action of melanin-concentrating hormone on 
luteinising hormone release involving MCH1 and melanocortin-5 receptors.

Murray JF(1), Hahn JD, Kennedy AR, Small CJ, Bloom SR, Haskell-Luevano C, Coen 
CW, Wilson CA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Physiology and Clinical Developmental 
Sciences; O&G, St George's University of London, London, UK.

The present series of studies aimed to further our understanding of the role of 
melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) neurones in the central regulation of 
luteinising hormone (LH) release in the female rat. LH release was stimulated 
when MCH was injected bilaterally into the rostral preoptic area (rPOA) or 
medial preoptic area (mPOA), but not when injected into the zona incerta (ZI), 
of oestrogen-primed ovariectomised rats. In rats that were steroid-primed to 
generate a surge-like release of LH, MCH administration into the ZI blocked this 
rise in LH release: no such effect occurred when MCH was injected into the rPOA 
or mPOA. In vitro, MCH stimulated gonadotrophin-releasing hormone (GnRH) release 
from hypothalamic explants. Double-label immunohistochemistry showed 
GnRH-immunoreactive neurones in the vicinity of and intermingled with 
immunoreactive MCH processes. MCH is the endogenous ligand of the MCH type 1 
receptor (MCH1-R). Previously, we have shown a role for melanocortin-5 receptors 
(MC5-R) in the stimulatory action of MCH, so we next investigated the 
involvement of both MCH1-R and/or MC5-R in mediating the actions of MCH on GnRH 
and hence LH release. The stimulatory action of MCH in the rPOA was inhibited by 
administration of antagonists for either MCH1-R or MC5-R. However, in the mPOA, 
the action of MCH was blocked only by the MC5-R antagonist. LH release was 
stimulated by an agonist for MC5-R injected into the rPOA or mPOA; this was 
blocked by the MC5-R antagonist but not the MCH1-R antagonist. These results 
indicate that both MCH1-R and MC5-R are involved in the central control of LH 
release by MCH.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2826.2005.01397.x
PMID: 16454799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
