1. J Pharmacol Toxicol Methods. 2006 May-Jun;53(3):272-6. doi: 
10.1016/j.vascn.2006.01.003. Epub 2006 Feb 24.

Development of a vacuum filtration system for the conventional microplate 
washer.

Lee S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Informatics, Sangmyung University, San 98-20, 
Anseo-Dong, Cheonan 330-720, Republic of Korea. lees@smu.ac.kr

INTRODUCTION: Filter plates are available from many vendors reflecting the 
growth of their scientific applications in various fields, however, the 
heterogeneous nature of those applications are the major factor to block the 
expansion of various filter plate options in a research scale operation. The 
development of an automatic vacuum filtration system for a conventional plate 
washer was presented as a possible solution for the filtration process in filter 
plate applications, especially in the melanin concentrating hormone receptor 
subtype 1 (MCH1) receptor binding assay with the time resolved fluorescence 
technology.
METHODS: The pilot modification was done in the Embla 96/384 well washer by 
replacing the original plate carriage with a new carriage mimicking the 
conventional vacuum manifold to add the function of flow-through vacuum 
filtration for filter plates. The performance of new vacuum filtration system 
was evaluated with MCH1 receptor binding assay and ligand washout experiments.
RESULTS: The mean background values from ligand washout experiments in AcroWell 
filter plates were 6406+/-502.9 with a manual vacuum manifold and 5563+/-585.8 
with the vacuum filtration system. Z' factors were calculated as 0.6101+/-0.095 
for the MCH1 receptor binding assay with the vacuum filtration system.
DISCUSSION: The new plate carriage for a conventional plate washer was developed 
for filter plate applications to enable its use in a flow-through vacuum 
filtration application in addition to the conventional plate washing by an 
aspiration. The results from ligand washout and receptor binding assay suggest 
that the vacuum filtration system can provide a cost-effective solution for 
filter plate applications and may alleviate the most common problems of those 
heterogeneous assays to develop as high throughput operations without major 
investments for the professional workstations.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vascn.2006.01.003
PMID: 16503172 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
