1. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2006;38(8):1290-9. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2006.01.007.
 Epub 2006 Feb 17.

Characterization of a neuronal cell line expressing native human 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1).

Fry D(1), Dayton B, Brodjian S, Ogiela C, Sidorowicz H, Frost LJ, McNally T, 
Reilly RM, Collins CA.

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Disease Research, Global Pharmaceutical Products Division, Abbott 
Laboratories, Abbott Park, IL 60064, United States. dennis.fry@abbott.com

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH), an orexigenic neuropeptide in mammals, 
activates a G-protein coupled receptor, MCHR1. It is expected that antagonists 
of MCHR1 function will prove therapeutically useful as anti-obesity agents. 
Intracellular signaling by MCHR1 has been investigated primarily using 
non-neural cell lines expressing the recombinant receptor, in which MCHR1 has 
been shown to couple to G alpha(i/o) and G alpha(q) G-proteins. While these cell 
lines have been widely utilized to discover and optimize small molecule 
antagonists, it is unknown whether the intracellular signaling pathways in these 
cells accurately reflect those in neurons. Thus, we sought to develop a neurally 
derived cell line endogenously expressing MCHR1. IMR32, a human neuroblastoma 
cell line, has been shown to express MCHR1 mRNA; however, we were unable to 
detect either MCH-binding or MCH-stimulated Ca++-mobilization in these cells. 
Following transfection of IMR32 cells with a plasmid encoding human G alpha(16) 
G-protein, we isolated a cell line, I3.4.2, which responded to MCH in 
Ca++-mobilization assays. We found that the expression level of MCHR1 mRNA in 
I3.4.2 cells was 2000-fold higher than in the parent cell line. Using [125I]MCH 
saturation-binding to I3.4.2 cell membranes, we estimated the Bmax as 0.72 
pmol/mg protein and the Kd as 0.35 nM. We report that Ca++-mobilization in 
I3.4.2 cells was insensitive to pertussis toxin (Ptx) treatment, indicating that 
signaling was via G alpha(q) G-proteins. Furthermore, negative results in cAMP 
accumulation assays confirmed the lack of signaling via the G alpha(i/o) 
G-proteins. Our results suggest that the I3.4.2 cell line may be useful for 
characterization of MCHR1 activity in a neural-derived cell line.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biocel.2006.01.007
PMID: 16524757 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
