1. J Med Chem. 2006 Apr 6;49(7):2339-52. doi: 10.1021/jm0512286.

Screening for cardiovascular safety: a structure-activity approach for guiding 
lead selection of melanin concentrating hormone receptor 1 antagonists.

Kym PR(1), Souers AJ, Campbell TJ, Lynch JK, Judd AS, Iyengar R, Vasudevan A, 
Gao J, Freeman JC, Wodka D, Mulhern M, Zhao G, Wagaw SH, Napier JJ, Brodjian S, 
Dayton BD, Reilly RM, Segreti JA, Fryer RM, Preusser LC, Reinhart GA, Hernandez 
L, Marsh KC, Sham HL, Collins CA, Polakowski JS.

Author information:
(1)Global Pharmaceutical Research and Development, Abbott Laboratories, 100 
Abbott Park Road, Abbott Park, Illinois 60064, USA. phil.kym@abbott.com

An inactin-anesthetized rat cardiovascular (CV) assay was employed in a 
screening mode to triage multiple classes of melanin-concentrating hormone 
receptor 1 (MCHr1) antagonists. Lead identification was based on a compound 
profile producing high drug concentration in both plasma (>40 microM) and brain 
(>20 microg/g) with <15% change in cardiovascular endpoints. As a result of 
these stringent requirements, lead optimization activities on multiple classes 
of MCHr1 antagonists were terminated. After providing evidence that the 
cardiovascular liabilities were not a function of MCHr1 antagonism, continued 
screening identified the chromone-substituted aminopiperidine amides as a class 
of MCHr1 antagonists that demonstrated a safe cardiovascular profile at high 
drug concentrations in both plasma and brain. The high incidence of adverse 
cardiovascular effects associated with an array of MCHr1 antagonists of 
significant chemical diversity, combined with the stringent safety requirements 
for antiobesity drugs, highlight the importance of incorporating cardiovascular 
safety assessment early in the lead selection process.

DOI: 10.1021/jm0512286
PMID: 16570930 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
