1. J Med Chem. 2006 Apr 6;49(7):2294-310. doi: 10.1021/jm050886n.

Discovery of orally efficacious melanin-concentrating hormone receptor-1 
antagonists as antiobesity agents. Synthesis, SAR, and biological evaluation of 
bicyclo[3.1.0]hexyl ureas.

McBriar MD(1), Guzik H, Shapiro S, Paruchova J, Xu R, Palani A, Clader JW, Cox 
K, Greenlee WJ, Hawes BE, Kowalski TJ, O'neill K, Spar BD, Weig B, Weston DJ, 
Farley C, Cook J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical Research and Department of Cardiovascular and 
Metabolic Diseases, Schering-Plough Research Institute, 2015 Galloping Hill 
Road, Kenilworth, New Jersey 07033-0539, USA. mark.mcbriar@spcorp.com

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a cyclic, nonadecapeptide expressed in 
the CNS of all vertebrates that regulates feeding behavior and energy 
homeostasis via interaction with the central melanocortin system. Regulation of 
this interaction results in modulation of food intake and body weight gain, 
demonstrating significant therapeutic potential for the treatment of obesity. 
The MCH-1 receptor (MCH-R1) has been identified as a key target in MCH 
regulation, as small molecule antagonists of MCH-R1 have demonstrated activity 
in vivo. Herein, we document our research in a bicyclo[3.1.0]hexyl urea series 
with particular emphasis on structure-activity relationships and optimization of 
receptor occupancy, measured both in vitro and via an ex vivo binding assay 
following an oral dosing regimen. Several compounds have been tested in vivo and 
exhibit oral efficacy in relevant acute rodent feeding models. In particular, 
24u has proven efficacious in chronic rodent models of obesity, showing a 
statistically significant reduction in food intake and body weight over a 28 day 
study.

DOI: 10.1021/jm050886n
PMID: 16570926 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
