1. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2006 May;290(5):E982-8. doi: 
10.1152/ajpendo.00138.2005.

Melanin-concentrating hormone stimulates human growth hormone secretion: a novel 
effect of MCH on the hypothalamic-pituitary axis.

Segal-Lieberman G(1), Rubinfeld H, Glick M, Kronfeld-Schor N, Shimon I.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Endocrinology, Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer, Israel 52621. 
gabriella.lieberman@sheba.health.gov.il

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH), a 19-amino acid orexigenic 
(appetite-stimulating) hypothalamic peptide, is an important regulator of energy 
homeostasis. It is cleaved from its precursor prepro-MCH (ppMCH) along with 
several other neuropeptides whose roles are not fully defined. Because pituitary 
hormones such as growth hormone (GH), ACTH, and thyroid-stimulating hormone 
affect body weight and composition, appetite, insulin sensitivity, and 
lipoprotein metabolism, we investigated whether MCH exerts direct effects on the 
human pituitary to regulate energy balance using dispersed human fetal 
pituitaries (21-22 wk gestation) and cultured GH-secreting adenomas. We found 
that MCH receptor-1 (MCH-R1), but not MCH receptor-2, is expressed in both 
normal (fetal and adult) human pituitary tissues and in GH cell adenomas. MCH 
(10 nM) stimulated GH release from human fetal pituitary cultures by up to 62% 
during a 4-h incubation (P < 0.05). Interestingly, neuropeptide EI (10 nM), 
which is also cleaved from ppMCH, increased human GH secretion by up to 124% in 
fetal pituitaries. A milder, albeit significant, induction of GH secretion by 
MCH (20%) was seen in cultured GH-secreting pituitary adenomas. A comparable 
stimulation of GH secretion was seen when cultured mouse pituitary cells were 
treated with MCH. Treatment of cultured GH adenoma cells with MCH (100 nM) 
induced extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1 and 2 phosphorylation, 
suggesting activation of MCH-R1. In aggregate, these data suggest that MCH may 
regulate pituitary GH secretion and imply a potential cross-talk mechanism 
between appetite-regulating neuropeptides and pituitary hormones.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpendo.00138.2005
PMID: 16603725 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
