1. CNS Drug Rev. 2005 Winter;11(4):341-52. doi:
10.1111/j.1527-3458.2005.tb00052.x.

ATC0175: an orally active melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 antagonist 
for the potential treatment of depression and anxiety.

Chaki S(1), Yamaguchi J, Yamada H, Thomsen W, Tran TA, Semple G, Sekiguchi Y.

Author information:
(1)Medicinal Pharmacology Laboratory, Medicinal Research Laboratories, Taisho 
Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., 1-403 Yoshino-cho, Kita-ku, Saitama, Saitama 331-9530, 
Japan. s.chaki@po.rd.taisho.co.jp

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) has been implicated in a variety of 
physiological events. Recent studies clearly suggest that MCH plays an important 
role in the regulation of stress and emotion. To date, two receptor subtypes of 
MCH (MCH1R and MCH2R) have been identified. MCH1R has been suggested to mediate 
most of the physiological functions of MCH. Recently, we synthesized an orally 
active, nonpeptidic antagonist of MCH1R, 
N-(cis-4-{[4-(dimethylamino)quinazolin-2-yl]amino}cyclohexyl)-3,4-difluorobenzamide 
hydrochloride (ATC0175). This compound is a potent antagonist with a high 
affinity for MCH1R and additional affinities for 5-HT1A and 5-HT2B receptors. 
The receptor binding and the functional assay (MCH-induced increase in [Ca2+]i) 
indicated that ATC0175 is a noncompetitive antagonist at MCH1Rs. ATC0175 
exhibited anxiolytic effects in numerous animal models of anxiety including the 
elevated plus-maze test, social interaction test, stress-induced hyperthermia 
and maternal separation-induced vocalization. Like with other stress-related 
peptide receptor antagonists, such as antagonists of corticotropin-releasing 
factor or vasopressin V1b receptor antagonists, anxiolytic effects of ATC0175 
were more pronounced in models containing a stress component. ATC0175 also 
exhibited antidepressant effects in the forced swimming test. ATC0175 increased 
swimming performance without altering climbing behavior, as observed with 
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors. ATC0175 has adequate ADME profile 
(reasonable oral bioavailability and brain penetration) and potent oral activity 
in animal models. In contrast, ATC0175 did not affect spontaneous locomotor 
activity, hexobarbital-induced sleeping time and did not impair rotarod 
performance. Thus, ATC0175 may be devoid of unwanted central nervous system side 
effects, which are sometimes observed with current medications. In addition, 
ATC0175 was well tolerated in rat repeated toxicity study, and had no genotoxic 
liability. Therefore, ATC0175 has the potential to be effective in the treatment 
of patients with depression and/or anxiety disorders.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1527-3458.2005.tb00052.x
PMCID: PMC6741758
PMID: 16614734 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
