1. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2006 Jul 5;141B(5):524-33. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.b.30335.

Association analyses suggest GPR24 as a shared susceptibility gene for bipolar 
affective disorder and schizophrenia.

Severinsen JE(1), Als TD, Binderup H, Kruse TA, Wang AG, Vang M, Muir WJ, 
Blackwood DH, Mors O, BÃ¸rglum AD.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Aarhus, Aarhus, Denmark.

Linkage analyses suggest that chromosome 22q12-13 may harbor a shared 
susceptibility locus for bipolar affective disorder (BPD) and schizophrenia 
(SZ). In a study of a sample from the Faeroe Islands we have previously reported 
association between both disorders and microsatellite markers in a 3.6 cM 
segment on 22q13. The present study investigated three candidate genes located 
in this segment: GPR24, ADSL, and ST13. Nine SNPs located in these genes and one 
microsatellite marker (D22S279) were applied in an association analysis of two 
samples: an extension of the previously analyzed Faeroese sample comprising 28 
distantly related cases (17 BPD, 11 SZ subjects) and 44 controls, and a Scottish 
sample including 162 patients with BPD, 103 with SZ, and 200 controls. In both 
samples significant associations were observed in both disorders with 
predominantly GPR24 SNPs and haplotypes. In the Faeroese sample overall P-values 
of 0.0009, 0.0054, and 0.0023 were found for haplotypes in BPD, SZ, and combined 
cases, respectively, and in the Scottish sample overall P-values of 0.0003, 
0.0005, and 0.016 were observed for similar groupings. Specific haplotypes 
showed associations with lowest P-values of 7 x 10(-5) and 0.0006 in the 
combined group of cases from the Faeroe Islands and Scotland, respectively. The 
G protein-coupled receptor 24 encoded by GPR24 binds melanin-concentrating 
hormone (MCH) and has been implicated with feeding behavior, energy metabolism, 
and regulation of stress and mood. To our knowledge this is the first study 
reporting association between GPR24 and BPD and SZ, suggesting that GPR24 
variants may confer susceptibility to both disorders.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.b.30335
PMID: 16741940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
