1. Behav Brain Res. 2006 Oct 2;173(1):94-103. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2006.06.007.
Epub  2006 Jul 12.

Mice lacking the melanin-concentrating hormone receptor-1 exhibit an atypical 
psychomotor susceptibility to cocaine and no conditioned cocaine response.

Tyhon A(1), Adamantidis A, Foidart A, Grisar T, Lakaye B, Tirelli E.

Author information:
(1)Unité de Recherche en Psychologie Expérimentale et Neurosciences Cognitives, 
Université de Liège, Boulevard du Rectorat, 5/B-32, Belgium.

The present study aimed at characterizing the acute and intermittent psychomotor 
responsiveness to cocaine in mice lacking the MCHR1 receptor, which is thought 
to modulate the mesocorticolimbic sytem functioning [Smith DG, Tzavara ET, Shaw 
J, Luecke S, Wade M, Davis R, et al. Mesolimbic dopamine super-sensitivity in 
melanin-concentrating hormone-1 receptor deficient mice. J Neurosci 
2005;25:914-22]. On a first free-drug session, MCHR1-deficient mice exhibited 
significantly higher levels of locomotor activity elicited by the novelty of the 
test chambers than their wild-type counterparts. On the following day session, a 
first injection of 6 or 12 mg/kg cocaine induced comparable dose-related 
psychomotor activations in both genotypes, without significant difference in the 
relative increase in locomotion. Over the following eight once-daily test 
sessions, the slight psychomotor increase induced by 6 mg/kg was equivalent in 
both genotypes and constant over the sessions. At 12 mg/kg, cocaine induced a 
clear-cut incremental responsiveness to cocaine in both genotypes on the three 
first sessions; on the following sessions, only the wild-types displayed an 
incremental responsiveness until the last session, a sensitized effect that was 
confirmed for the wild-types but not for the knockouts on a subsequent 
sensitization test (cocaine challenge). Finally, the knockouts did not exhibit 
any sign of cocaine-conditioning (saline challenge), contrarily to the 
wild-types. It is speculated that MCHR1 may contribute to the neurobiological 
mechanisms of conditioned cocaine-induced psychomotor effects, possibly to those 
underpinning sensitization, and to a lesser extent to those sub-serving acute 
pharmacological cocaine action.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2006.06.007
PMID: 16839618 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
