1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Oct 27;281(43):32496-507. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M602889200. Epub 
2006 Aug 31.

Interaction of neurochondrin with the melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 
interferes with G protein-coupled signal transduction but not agonist-mediated 
internalization.

Francke F(1), Ward RJ, Jenkins L, Kellett E, Richter D, Milligan G, BÃ¤chner D.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Cell Biochemistry and Clinical Neurobiology, University 
Hospital Hamburg-Eppendorf, Martinistrasse 52, 20246 Hamburg, Germany.

Screening of a human brain cDNA library using the C-terminal tail of the 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1) as bait in a yeast two-hybrid 
assay resulted in the identification of the neurite-outgrowth related factor, 
neurochondrin. This interaction was verified in overlay, pulldown, and 
co-immunoprecipitation assays. Deletion mapping confined the binding to the C 
terminus of neurochondrin and to the proximal C terminus of MCHR1, a region 
known to be involved in G protein binding and signal transduction. This region 
of the MCHR1 is also able to interact with the actin- and intermediate 
filament-binding protein, periplakin. Interactions of MCHR1 with neurochondrin 
and periplakin were competitive, indicating that these two proteins bind to 
overlapping regions of MCHR1. Although neurochondrin did not interfere with 
melanin-concentrating hormone-mediated internalization of the receptor, it did 
inhibit G protein-coupled signal transduction via both Galpha(i/o) and 
Galpha(q/11) family G proteins as measured by each of melanin-concentrating 
hormone-induced G protein-activated inwardly rectifying K(+) channel activity of 
voltage-clamped amphibian oocytes, by calcium mobilization in transfected 
mammalian cells, and by reduction in the capacity of melanin-concentrating 
hormone to promote binding of [(35)S]guanosine 5'-3-O-(thio)triphosphate to both 
Galpha(o1) and Galpha(11). Immunohistochemistry revealed co-expression of 
neurochondrin and MCHR1 within the rodent brain, suggesting that neurochondrin 
may be involved in the regulation of MCHR1 signaling and play a role in 
modulating melanin-concentrating hormone-mediated functions in vivo.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M602889200
PMID: 16945926 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
