1. CNS Drugs. 2006;20(10):801-11. doi: 10.2165/00023210-200620100-00002.

Melanin-concentrating hormone MCH1 receptor antagonists: a potential new 
approach to the treatment of depression and anxiety disorders.

Shimazaki T(1), Yoshimizu T, Chaki S.

Author information:
(1)Medicinal Pharmacology Laboratory, Medicinal Research Laboratories, Taisho 
Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd, Saitama, Japan.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a cyclic 19-amino-acid neuropeptide that 
has been considered to play a key role in the regulation of feeding and energy 
homeostasis. To date, two receptor subtypes for MCH (designated MCH(1) and 
MCH(2)) have been identified; the MCH(1) receptor has been proposed to mediate 
the physiological functions of MCH in rodents. In addition to the crucial roles 
of MCH in feeding behaviour, anatomical and neurochemical studies suggest that 
the MCH/MCH(1) system is involved in the regulation of emotion and stress 
responses. This assumption has been supported by a recent series of 
neurochemical and behavioural studies. Indeed, several lines of evidence show 
that MCH activates stress responses and induces depressive- and anxiety-like 
behaviours, while the blockade of MCH(1) receptors results in antidepressant and 
anxiolytic effects in various rodent models. Moreover, MCH may decrease reward 
activity while increasing hypothalamus-pituitary adrenal axis activity, both of 
which may underlie the neurochemical mechanisms of the depression and 
anxiety-like effects induced by MCH. The effects of MCH(1) receptor antagonists 
in animal models, together with their rapid onset of effect and lack of adverse 
CNS effects, suggest that they deserve further investigation as potential new 
treatments for depression and anxiety disorders.

DOI: 10.2165/00023210-200620100-00002
PMID: 16999451 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
