1. J Med Chem. 2006 Nov 2;49(22):6569-84. doi: 10.1021/jm060683e.

Optimization of chromone-2-carboxamide melanin concentrating hormone receptor 1 
antagonists: assessment of potency, efficacy, and cardiovascular safety.

Lynch JK(1), Freeman JC, Judd AS, Iyengar R, Mulhern M, Zhao G, Napier JJ, Wodka 
D, Brodjian S, Dayton BD, Falls D, Ogiela C, Reilly RM, Campbell TJ, Polakowski 
JS, Hernandez L, Marsh KC, Shapiro R, Knourek-Segel V, Droz B, Bush E, Brune M, 
Preusser LC, Fryer RM, Reinhart GA, Houseman K, Diaz G, Mikhail A, Limberis JT, 
Sham HL, Collins CA, Kym PR.

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Disease Research, Integrative Pharmacology, Process Chemistry, and 
Exploratory Pharmacokinetics, Abbott Laboratories, 100 Abbott Park Road, Abbott 
Park, IL 60064, USA. john.k.lynch@abbott.com

Evaluation of multiple structurally distinct series of melanin concentrating 
hormone receptor 1 antagonists in an anesthetized rat cardiovascualar assay led 
to the identification of a chromone-2-carboxamide series as having excellent 
safety against the chosen cardiovascular endpoints at high drug concentrations 
in the plasma and brain. Optimization of this series led to considerable 
improvements in affinity, functional potency, and pharmacokinetic profile. This 
led to the identification of a 7-fluorochromone-2-carboxamide (22) that was 
orally efficacious in a diet-induced obese mouse model, retained a favorable 
cardiovascular profile in rat, and demonstrated dramatic improvement in effects 
on mean arterial pressure in our dog cardiovascular model compared to other 
series reported by our group. However, this analogue also led to prolongation of 
the QT interval in the dog that was linked to affinity for hERG channel and 
unexpectedly potent functional blockade of this ion channel.

DOI: 10.1021/jm060683e
PMID: 17064075 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
