1. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2007 Apr;321(1):237-48. doi: 10.1124/jpet.106.109678.
Epub  2007 Jan 19.

Efficacy of the MCHR1 antagonist 
N-[3-(1-{[4-(3,4-difluorophenoxy)phenyl]methyl}(4-piperidyl))-4-methylphenyl]-2-methylpropanamide 
(SNAP 94847) in mouse models of anxiety and depression following acute and 
chronic administration is independent of hippocampal neurogenesis.

David DJ(1), Klemenhagen KC, Holick KA, Saxe MD, Mendez I, Santarelli L, Craig 
DA, Zhong H, Swanson CJ, Hegde LG, Ping XI, Dong D, Marzabadi MR, Gerald CP, Hen 
R.

Author information:
(1)Center for Neurobiology and Behavior, Columbia University, New York, New 
York, USA.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a hypothalamic neuropeptide that plays a 
role in the modulation of food intake and mood. In rodents, the actions of MCH 
are mediated via the MCHR1 receptor. The goal of this study was to investigate 
the effects of acute (1 h) and chronic (28 days) p.o. dosing of a novel MCHR1 
antagonist, 
N-[3-(1-{[4-(3,4-difluorophenoxy)-phenyl]methyl}(4-piperidyl))-4-methylphenyl]-2-methylpropanamide 
(SNAP 94847), in three mouse models predictive of antidepressant/anxiolytic-like 
activity: novelty suppressed feeding (NSF) in 129S6/SvEvTac mice and light/dark 
paradigm (L/D) and forced swim test (FST) in BALB/cJ mice. A significant 
increase in the time spent in the light compartment of the L/D box was observed 
in response to acute and chronic treatment with SNAP 94847. An 
anxiolytic/antidepressant-like effect was found in the NSF test after acute and 
chronic treatment, whereas no effect was observed in the FST. Because 
neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus has been shown to be a requirement for the 
effects of antidepressants in the NSF test, we investigated whether neurogenesis 
was required for the effect of SNAP 94847. We showed that chronic treatment with 
SNAP 94847 stimulated proliferation of progenitors in the dentate gyrus. The 
efficacy of SNAP 94847 in the NSF test, however, was unaltered in mice in which 
neurogenesis was suppressed by X-irradiation. These results indicate that SNAP 
94847 has a unique anxiolytic-like profile after both acute and chronic 
administration and that its mechanism of action is distinct from that of 
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and tricyclic antidepressants.

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.106.109678
PMID: 17237257 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
