1. Diabetes. 2007 Feb;56(2):311-9. doi: 10.2337/db06-0708.

Melanin concentrating hormone is a novel regulator of islet function and growth.

Pissios P(1), Ozcan U, Kokkotou E, Okada T, Liew CW, Liu S, Peters JN, Dahlgren 
G, Karamchandani J, Kudva YC, Kurpad AJ, Kennedy RT, Maratos-Flier E, Kulkarni 
RN.

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA 
02215, USA.

Melanin concentrating hormone (MCH) is a hypothalamic neuropeptide known to play 
a critical role in energy balance. We have previously reported that 
overexpression of MCH is associated with mild obesity. In addition, mice have 
substantial hyperinsulinemia and islet hyperplasia that is out of proportion 
with their degree of obesity. In this study, we further explored the role of MCH 
in the endocrine pancreas. Both MCH and MCHR1 are expressed in mouse and human 
islets and in clonal beta-cell lines as assessed using quantitative real-time 
PCR and immunohistochemistry. Mice lacking MCH (MCH-KO) on either a C57Bl/6 or 
129Sv genetic background showed a significant reduction in beta-cell mass and 
complemented our earlier observation of increased beta-cell mass in 
MCH-overexpressing mice. Furthermore, the compensatory islet hyperplasia 
secondary to a high-fat diet, which was evident in wild-type controls, was 
attenuated in MCH-KO. Interestingly, MCH enhanced insulin secretion in human and 
mouse islets and rodent beta-cell lines in a dose-dependent manner. Real-time 
PCR analyses of islet RNA derived from MCH-KO revealed altered expression of 
islet-enriched genes such as glucagon, forkhead homeobox A2, hepatocyte nuclear 
factor (HNF)4alpha, and HNF1alpha. Together, these data provide novel evidence 
for an autocrine role for MCH in the regulation of beta-cell mass dynamics and 
in islet secretory function and suggest that MCH is part of a hypothalamic-islet 
(pancreatic) axis.

DOI: 10.2337/db06-0708
PMID: 17259374 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
