1. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2007 Apr;151(2):210-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2007.01.011. 
Epub 2007 Jan 25.

The melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 2 (MCH-R2) mediates the effect of MCH 
to control body color for background adaptation in the barfin flounder.

Takahashi A(1), Kosugi T, Kobayashi Y, Yamanome T, Schi√∂th HB, Kawauchi H.

Author information:
(1)School of Fisheries Sciences, Kitasato University, Ofunato, Iwate 022-0101, 
Japan. akiyoshi@kitasato-u.ac.jp

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a neuropeptide generated in neurons 
originating in the hypothalamus, from which axons project to the entire brain 
and neurohypophysis in fish. MCH has both central and peripheral roles such as 
food intake and body color change. Here we cloned two MCH receptors (MCH-R) from 
the barfin flounder, Verasper moseri, Pleuronectiformes. The phylogenetic 
analysis shows that these are orthologues to the mammalian MCH-R1 and MCH-R2 
showing 49 and 30% amino acid sequence identity to the corresponding human 
receptors while they have 31% amino acid sequence identify between them. 
Essential amino acid residues for ligand binding, signal transduction and 
receptor conformation, which have been shown in mammalian MCH-R, are well 
conserved in the flounder MCH-Rs. MCH-R1 has one intron in the extracellular 
N-terminal region and MCH-R2 has one intron in the DRY motif, which is a 
homologous position to one of the five introns of human MCH-R2. Orthologues of 
MCH-R1 and MCH-R2 may have appeared by gene duplication of the ancestry of 
MCH-Rs having at least two introns, and then MCH-R1 and MCH-R2 inherited 
different introns in flounder strains. We also determined their tissue 
distribution and functional role in rearing condition. Reverse transcription PCR 
revealed that the expression of MCH-R1 is confined to the brain of the barfin 
flounder, while transcripts of MCH-R2 were detected in the brain, pituitary, 
eyeball, gill, atrium, ventricle, head kidney, body kidney, spleen, intestine, 
inclinator, skeletal muscle testis, ovary, eyed-side skin, and non-eyed-side 
skin. The expression of MCH-R2 in eyed-side skin was higher in fish reared in a 
black tank (121 days) than in a white tank while the expression levels of MCH in 
the brain were significantly greater in the group reared with the white 
background suggesting down-regulation of this receptor gene with increased 
levels of MCH. The results suggest that the MCH-R2 mediates the effect of MCH to 
control body color for background adaptation in the eyed-side skin of the barfin 
flounder.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2007.01.011
PMID: 17324419 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
