1. J Comput Aided Mol Des. 2007 May;21(5):251-67. doi: 10.1007/s10822-007-9112-4.
 Epub 2007 Mar 22.

Optimization of biaryl piperidine and 4-amino-2-biarylurea MCH1 receptor 
antagonists using QSAR modeling, classification techniques and virtual 
screening.

Melagraki G(1), Afantitis A, Sarimveis H, Koutentis PA, Markopoulos J, 
Igglessi-Markopoulou O.

Author information:
(1)School of Chemical Engineering, National Technical University of Athens, 
Athens, Greece.

This paper presents the results of an optimization study on biaryl piperidine 
and 4-amino-2-biarylurea MCH1 receptor antagonists, which was accomplished by 
using quantitative-structure activity relationships (QSARs), classification and 
virtual screening techniques. First, a linear QSAR model was developed using 
Multiple Linear Regression (MLR) Analysis, while the Elimination 
Selection-Stepwise Regression (ES-SWR) method was adopted for selecting the most 
suitable input variables. The predictive activity of the model was evaluated 
using an external validation set and the Y-randomization technique. Based on the 
selected descriptors, the Support Vector Machines (SVM) classification technique 
was utilized to classify data into two categories: "actives" or "non-actives". 
Several attempts were made to optimize the scaffold of most potent compounds by 
inducing various structural modifications. Potential derivatives with improved 
activities were identified, as they were classified "actives" by the SVM 
classifier. Their activities were estimated using the produced MLR model. A 
detailed analysis on the model applicability domain defined the compounds, whose 
estimations can be accepted with confidence.

DOI: 10.1007/s10822-007-9112-4
PMID: 17377847 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
