1. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2007 Aug;31(8):1325-37. doi: 
10.1111/j.1530-0277.2007.00427.x. Epub 2007 Jun 5.

Alcohol drinking in MCH receptor-1-deficient mice.

Duncan EA(1), Sorrell JE, Adamantidis A, Rider T, Jandacek RJ, Seeley RJ, Lakaye 
B, Woods SC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.

BACKGROUND: Recently, we demonstrated that exogenous melanin-concentrating 
hormone (MCH) increases alcohol drinking in rats when administered into the 
brain. However, because the physiological relevance of this finding is unclear, 
we tested the hypothesis that endogenous MCH signaling enhances alcohol 
consumption.
METHODS: Alcohol intake was assessed in male and female wildtype (WT), 
heterozygous (HET), and homozygous MCH receptor-1-deficient (KO) mice. Mice were 
given 24-hour access to a series of alcohol-containing solutions. Following 
this, the mice were given limited (1-hour) access to 10% alcohol. Finally, mice 
were allowed 24-hour access to sucrose/quinine as a caloric control and a means 
to assess taste preference. A naïve cohort of male WT and KO mice was tested for 
alcohol clearance following intraperitoneal administration of 3 g/kg alcohol. 
Another naïve cohort of female mice was utilized to confirm that 
intracerebroventricular administration of MCH (5 microg) would augment alcohol 
drinking in mice.
RESULTS: Exogenous MCH enhanced 10% alcohol consumption in mice 
(saline=0.45+/-0.08 g/kg, 5 microg MCH=0.94+/-0.20 g/kg). Male KO mice consumed 
more 10% alcohol (11.50+/-1.31 g/kg) than WT (6.26+/-1.23 g/kg) and HET mice 
(6.49+/-1.23 g/kg) during ad libitum access. However, alcohol intake was similar 
among genotypes during 1 hour daily access. Male KO mice tended to consume less 
17.75% sucrose+1.3 mM quinine than controls (WT=10.5+/-3.6, HET=7.5+/-1.7, 
KO=4.4+/-0.9 g/kg). Alcohol metabolism was similar between WT and KO mice.
CONCLUSIONS: The finding that male KO consume more alcohol than WT and HET mice, 
are reminiscent of the counterintuitive reports that KO mice are hyperphagic and 
yet eat more when administered exogenous MCH. Changes in taste preference or 
alcohol metabolism do not appear to be important for the increased alcohol 
drinking in KO mice.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1530-0277.2007.00427.x
PMID: 17550369 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
