1. Cell Signal. 2007 Sep;19(9):1919-27. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2007.05.001. Epub 
2007 May 17.

Receptor-coupling properties of the invertebrate visual guanine nucleotide 
binding protein iGqalpha.

Go L(1), Mitchell J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Invertebrate visual iG(q)alpha is homologous to mammalian mG(q)alpha in two of 
the three domains important for G protein interaction with receptors; the 
C-terminus and the linker regions that connect the helical and ras-like domains 
of the alpha subunit. The third receptor-interacting domain, the N-terminus, 
contains a six amino acid extension MTLESI in mG(q)alpha that is not present in 
iG(q)alpha. In co-expression studies we assessed the promiscuity and efficacy of 
receptor coupling to phospholipase C (PLC) by iG(q)alpha, a non-palmitoylated 
mutant iG(q)alpha(C3,4A), mG(q)alpha and G(15)alpha. The invertebrate G proteins 
and mG(q)alpha only coupled to G(q)-coupled receptors (m1 muscarinic 
acetylcholine receptor (mChR1), alpha(1A)-adrenergic receptor (alpha1-AR)) and 
not to the G(i/s)-coupled receptors (CCR1 receptor, beta2-adrenergic receptor or 
dopamine D1 receptor) while G(15)alpha coupled to all receptors. iG(q)alpha and 
iG(q)alpha(C3,4A) both had double the efficacy for PLC activation compared to 
the mammalian G proteins when co-expressed with mChR1 and alpha1-AR. The 
increased efficacy of iG(q)alpha compared to mG(q)alpha was also seen downstream 
of PLC with carbachol stimulation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase, 
ERK1/2. Addition of the MTLESI extension onto the N-terminus of iG(q)alpha 
decreased its efficacy by 35% whereas deletion of this sequence from mG(q)alpha 
increased its efficacy by 60% in the PLC and ERK1/2 assays. iG(q)alpha, 
iG(q)alpha(C3,4A) and mG(q)alpha all displayed similar receptor-independent 
AlF(4)(-)activation of PLC and guanosine triphosphate hydrolysis (GTPase) 
activity. iG(q)alpha, and iG(q)alpha(C3,4A) both had increased 
receptor-activated guanosine 5'-[gamma-[(35)S]thio]triphosphate 
([(35)S]GTPgammaS) binding when compared to mG(q)alpha when co-expressed with 
the mChR1. These results demonstrate that G(q) protein efficacy is at least 
partially determined by the presence of the amino-terminal MTLESI extension. 
Comparison of [(35)S]GTPgammaS binding rates helps explain the increased 
efficacy of the invertebrate G proteins.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2007.05.001
PMID: 17560078 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
