1. Curr Top Med Chem. 2007;7(15):1471-88. doi: 10.2174/156802607782194699.

Lead optimization strategies and tactics applied to the discovery of melanin 
concentrating hormone receptor 1 antagonists.

Kym PR(1), Judd AS, Lynch JK, Iyengar R, Vasudevan A, Souers AJ.

Author information:
(1)Global Pharmaceutical Research and Development, Abbott Laboratories, 100 
Abbott Park Road, Abbott Park, IL 60064, USA. phil.kym@abbott.com

The discovery of small molecule melanin concentrating hormone receptor (MCHr1) 
antagonists as novel therapeutic agents for the treatment of obesity has been 
actively pursued across the pharmaceutical industry. While multiple chemotypes 
of small molecule MCHr1 antagonists have been identified and shown to deliver 
weight loss in animal models of obesity, many of these lead compounds have been 
found to cross-react with the hERG channel and/or demonstrate deleterious 
effects on cardiovascular hemodynamic parameters. This review describes an 
approach to rapidly identifying safer MCHr1 antagonists by placing assays to 
assess cardiovascular safety early in the lead optimization compound 
prioritization process. Ultimately, despite putting significant effort toward 
the discovery of a MCHr1 antagonist for the treatment of obesity, we were unable 
to deliver a candidate compound that attained an acceptable therapeutic index 
(TI = 30-100) in our in vivo models. Our inability to identify a compound with 
an acceptable therapeutic index was driven by two primary factors: 1) high 
levels of sustained drug exposure in the brain was required to achieve efficacy; 
and 2) many small molecule MCHR1 receptor antagonists suffer from receptor 
cross-reactivity that leads to cardiovascular toxicity at low multiples of their 
therapeutic plasma concentration.

DOI: 10.2174/156802607782194699
PMID: 17897033 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
