1. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2008 Jan;324(1):206-13. doi: 10.1124/jpet.107.130435.
Epub  2007 Oct 11.

Small-molecule melanin-concentrating hormone-1 receptor antagonists require 
brain penetration for inhibition of food intake and reduction in body weight.

Eric Hu X(1), Wos JA, Dowty ME, Suchanek PM, Ji W, Chambers JB, Benoit SC, Clegg 
DJ, Reizes O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic 
Foundation, 9500 Euclid Avenue, NC10, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

The melanin-concentrating hormone-1 receptor (MCH1R) is a G-protein-coupled 
receptor expressed in the brain and peripheral tissues that regulates energy 
storage and body weight. Here, we focused on discovery of the mechanism and site 
of action for a small-molecule MCH1R antagonist, which yields weight loss in a 
mouse model of human obesity. MCH1R is expressed throughout the brain but also 
found in peripheral tissues known to regulate fat storage and utilization, e.g., 
skeletal muscle and adipose tissue. Previous studies of MCH1R antagonist studies 
have not delineated the site that is critical for mediating the anorexigenic and 
weight-reducing actions. In this study, we evaluated the role of the brain and 
peripheral tissue receptors. We developed a novel nonbrain-permeable MCH 
antagonist analog with a carboxylic acid moiety to specifically test the site of 
action. Based on in vitro and in vivo assays, the analog is not able to cross 
the blood-brain barrier and does not lead to inhibition of food intake and 
reduced body weight. The data clearly demonstrate that MCH1R antagonists need 
access to the brain to reduce body weight and fat mass. The brain-permeable 
MCH1R antagonist leads to significant reduction in body weight and fat mass in 
diet-induced obese mice. The effect is dose-dependent and appears to be 
partially driven by a reduction in food intake. Finally, these studies show the 
utility of a medicinal chemistry approach to address an important biological and 
pharmacological question.

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.107.130435
PMID: 17932246 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
