1. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2008 Feb;88(4):446-55. doi:
10.1016/j.pbb.2007.10.001.  Epub 2007 Oct 10.

Deletion of Melanin-Concentrating Hormone Receptor-1 gene accentuates 
D-amphetamine-induced psychomotor activation but neither the subsequent 
development of sensitization nor the expression of conditioned activity in mice.

Tyhon A(1), Lakaye B, Grisar T, Tirelli E.

Author information:
(1)Centre de Neurosciences Cognitives et Comportementales, Université de Liège, 
Belgium.

The present study aimed to test the hypothesis that mice lacking the MCHR1 
receptor (Melanin-Concentrating Hormone Receptor-1) present an elevated 
vulnerability towards the neurobehavioural effects of D-amphetamine, presumably 
due to previously established up-regulations of dopamine D1 receptors in these 
mice. We examined the psychomotor effects of five once-daily injections of 1.5 
and 3 mg/kg D-amphetamine (i.p.) or ten once-daily injections of 2.25 mg/kg 
D-amphetamine in knockout (KO) mice lacking the MCHR1 receptor. The first 
injection of D-amphetamine induced a greater psychomotor response amongst the KO 
mice at 2.25 and 3.0 mg/kg. On all subsequent d-amphetamine injections, KO mice 
still showed greater levels of psychomotor activity than the WT mice, but with 
no between-genotype difference in the rate of development of sensitization 
(similar slopes of the curves). Furthermore, 24 h after the last injection of 
2.25 mg/kg D-amphetamine both genotypes exhibited a significant 
post-sensitization conditioned activity. Thus, MCHR1 receptors are likely not 
deeply involved in the mechanisms of induction of sensitization and related 
conditioned activity induced by D-amphetamine, albeit our results confirm a 
contribution of these receptors to the mechanisms of the acute effects of that 
drug, possibly via an inhibitory action on the dopaminergic mesolimbic system. 
Our results do not support the hypothesis of a functional contribution of MCHR1 
receptors to the addictive effects of D-amphetamine.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pbb.2007.10.001
PMID: 17996928 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
