1. Eur J Pharmacol. 2008 Jan 28;579(1-3):177-88. doi:
10.1016/j.ejphar.2007.10.017.  Epub 2007 Oct 23.

Blocking melanin-concentrating hormone MCH1 receptor affects rat sleep-wake 
architecture.

Ahnaou A(1), Drinkenburg WH, Bouwknecht JA, Alcazar J, Steckler T, Dautzenberg 
FM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, RED Europe Johnson & Johnson Pharmaceutical 
Research and Development, Turnhoutseweg 30, B-2340 Beerse, Belgium. 
aahnaou@prd.jnj.com

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a hypothalamic peptide that centrally 
regulates food intake, energy balance and emotion. Interestingly, MCH and 
melanin-concentrating hormone MCH(1) receptors are distributed in brain areas 
known to regulate vigilance states. Effects of subcutaneous administration of 
two selective melanin-concentrating hormone MCH(1) receptor antagonists, labeled 
A and B were examined over a broad dose range (1, 3, 10, 20, 40 mg/kg) on rat 
sleep-wake architecture. Both compounds have a nanomolar antagonist activity at 
recombinant human melanin-concentrating hormone MCH(1) receptor 
(IC(50)=44.1+/-6.1 nM and 26.6+/-5.4 nM, respectively) and potently inhibited 
the MCH-induced mobilization of [Ca(2+)] (IC(50) 29.1+/-8.1 nM and 10.5+/-4.1 
nM, respectively). The selectivity of both compounds was further confirmed on a 
panel of receptors, transporters and channels. In vivo, both compounds 
dose-dependently decreased deep sleep primarily by decreasing the mean duration 
of episodes during the first 4 h post-administration. In parallel, REM sleep and 
intermediate stage sleep were decreased while active and passive waking 
increased. Deep sleep and REM sleep onset latencies were significantly prolonged 
at higher doses. No homeostatic rebound of deep sleep was observed, while a 
tendency for recovery of REM sleep was found during subsequent dark phase. 
Together, the results support a role of the melanin-concentrating hormone MCH(1) 
receptor in the regulation of deep slow-wave sleep-REM sleep cycle. Therapeutic 
application of melanin-concentrating hormone MCH(1) receptor-inhibiting agents 
should take into account the significant decreases in deep sleep without 
recovery as these may interfere with sleep dependent memory consolidation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2007.10.017
PMID: 18062961 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
