1. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2007 Dec;15(12):2902-7. doi: 10.1038/oby.2007.345.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms of the MCHR1 gene do not affect metabolism in 
humans.

Rutanen J(1), Pihlajamäki J, Vänttinen M, Salmenniemi U, Ruotsalainen E, 
Kuulasmaa T, Kainulainen S, Kuusisto J, Laakso M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Kuopio and Kuopio University Hospital, 
70210 Kuopio, Finland.

Melanin concentrating hormone receptor-1 (MCHR1) is a centrally and peripherally 
expressed receptor that regulates energy expenditure and appetite. Single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of the MCHR1 gene have been previously 
associated with obesity, but the results are inconsistent among different 
populations. This study was performed to determine whether SNPs of MCHR1 affect 
glucose and energy metabolism. We screened six SNPs of MCHR1 in a 
cross-sectional study of 217 middle-age, non-diabetic Finnish subjects who were 
offspring of type 2 diabetic patients. Insulin secretion was evaluated by an 
intravenous glucose tolerance test and insulin sensitivity and energy metabolism 
by the hyperinsulinemic euglycemic clamp and indirect calorimetry. SNPs of MCHR1 
were not associated with BMI, waist circumference, subcutaneous or 
intra-abdominal fat area, glucose tolerance, first-phase insulin release, 
insulin sensitivity, or energy metabolism. One SNP, which was in >0.50 linkage 
disequilibrium with the other five SNPs, was also screened in 1455 unrelated 
Finnish middle-age subjects in a population-based study. No differences in BMI, 
waist circumference, or glucose or insulin levels in an oral glucose tolerance 
test among the genotypes were found. In conclusion, SNPs of MCHR1 did not have 
effects on metabolic variables in humans.

DOI: 10.1038/oby.2007.345
PMID: 18198296 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
