1. Mol Biol Cell. 2008 Apr;19(4):1540-7. doi: 10.1091/mbc.e07-09-0942. Epub 2008 
Feb 6.

Identification of ciliary localization sequences within the third intracellular 
loop of G protein-coupled receptors.

Berbari NF(1), Johnson AD, Lewis JS, Askwith CC, Mykytyn K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Division of Human Genetics, and College of 
Medicine, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Primary cilia are sensory organelles present on most mammalian cells. The 
functions of cilia are defined by the signaling proteins localized to the 
ciliary membrane. Certain G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), including 
somatostatin receptor 3 (Sstr3) and serotonin receptor 6 (Htr6), localize to 
cilia. As Sstr3 and Htr6 are the only somatostatin and serotonin receptor 
subtypes that localize to cilia, we hypothesized they contain ciliary 
localization sequences. To test this hypothesis we expressed chimeric receptors 
containing fragments of Sstr3 and Htr6 in the nonciliary receptors Sstr5 and 
Htr7, respectively, in ciliated cells. We found the third intracellular loop of 
Sstr3 or Htr6 is sufficient for ciliary localization. Comparison of these loops 
revealed a loose consensus sequence. To determine whether this consensus 
sequence predicts ciliary localization of other GPCRs, we compared it with the 
third intracellular loop of all human GPCRs. We identified the consensus 
sequence in melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (Mchr1) and confirmed Mchr1 
localizes to primary cilia in vitro and in vivo. Thus, we have identified a 
putative GPCR ciliary localization sequence and used this sequence to identify a 
novel ciliary GPCR. As Mchr1 mediates feeding behavior and metabolism, our 
results implicate ciliary signaling in the regulation of body weight.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.e07-09-0942
PMCID: PMC2291422
PMID: 18256283 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
