1. Eur J Neurosci. 2008 Apr;27(7):1793-800. doi:
10.1111/j.1460-9568.2008.06129.x.

Sleep architecture of the melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1-knockout 
mice.

Adamantidis A(1), Salvert D, Goutagny R, Lakaye B, Gervasoni D, Grisar T, Luppi 
PH, Fort P.

Author information:
(1)Research Center for Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology, Unit of Molecular 
Neurophysiology, University of Liège, 1 Avenue de l'Hôpital, Bat. B-36, 4000 
Liège, Belgium. tidis@stanford.edu

Growing amounts of data indicate involvement of the posterior hypothalamus in 
the regulation of sleep, especially paradoxical sleep (PS). Accordingly, we 
previously showed that the melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH)-producing neurons 
of the rat hypothalamus are selectively activated during a PS rebound. In 
addition, intracerebroventricular infusion of MCH increases total sleep 
duration, suggesting a new role for MCH in sleep regulation. To determine 
whether activation of the MCH system promotes sleep, we studied spontaneous 
sleep and its homeostatic regulation in mice with deletion of the MCH-receptor 1 
gene (MCH-R1-/- vs. MCH-R1+/+) and their behavioural response to modafinil, a 
powerful antinarcoleptic drug. Here, we show that the lack of functional MCH-R1 
results in a hypersomniac-like phenotype, both in basal conditions and after 
total sleep deprivation, compared to wild-type mice. Further, we found that 
modafinil was less potent at inducing wakefulness in MCH-R1-/- than in MCH-R1+/+ 
mice. We report for the first time that animals with genetically inactivated MCH 
signaling exhibit altered vigilance state architecture and sleep homeostasis. 
This study also suggests that the MCH system may modulate central pathways 
involved in the wake-promoting effect of modafinil.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2008.06129.x
PMID: 18380672 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
