1. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2008 Dec;11(8):1105-22. doi: 
10.1017/S1461145708008894. Epub 2008 May 9.

The melanin-concentrating hormone1 receptor antagonists, SNAP-7941 and GW3430, 
enhance social recognition and dialysate levels of acetylcholine in the frontal 
cortex of rats.

Millan MJ(1), Gobert A, Panayi F, Rivet JM, Dekeyne A, Brocco M, Ortuno JC, Di 
Cara B.

Author information:
(1)Division of Psychopharmacology, Institut de Recherches Servier, 
Croissy-sur-Seine, France. mark.millan@fr.netgrs.com

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH)1 receptors are widely expressed in limbic 
structures and cortex. Their inactivation is associated with anxiolytic and 
antidepressive properties but little information is available concerning 
cognition. This issue was addressed using the selective antagonists, SNAP-7941 
and GW3430, in a social recognition paradigm in rats. The muscarinic blocker, 
scopolamine (1.25 mg/kg s.c.), reduced social recognition, an action 
dose-dependently blocked by SNAP-7941 and GW3430 (0.63-10.0 and 20.0-80.0 mg/kg 
i.p., respectively) which did not themselves display amnesic properties. 
Further, in a protocol where a spontaneous deficit was induced by a prolonged 
inter-session delay, SNAP-7941 and GW3430 dose-dependently enhanced social 
recognition. In dialysis studies, SNAP-7941 (0.63-40.0 mg/kg i.p.) and GW3430 
(10.0-40.0 mg/kg i.p.) elevated extracellular levels of acetylcholine (ACh) in 
the frontal cortex (FCX) of freely moving rats. The SNAP-7941 effect was 
specific, as it did not increase levels of ACh in ventral and dorsal 
hippocampus: moreover, it did not modify levels of noradrenaline, dopamine, 
serotonin and glutamate in FCX. Active doses of SNAP-7941 and GW3430 
corresponded to doses (2.5-40.0 and 10.0-80.0 mg/kg i.p., respectively) exerting 
anxiolytic properties in Vogel conflict and ultrasonic vocalization tests, and 
antidepressant actions in forced swim, isolation-induced aggression and 
marble-burying procedures. In contrast to SNAP-7941 and GW3430, the 
benzodiazepine, diazepam, decreased social recognition and dialysate levels of 
ACh, while the tricyclic, imipramine, reduced social recognition and failed to 
enhance cholinergic transmission. In conclusion, at anxiolytic and 
antidepressant doses, SNAP-7941 and GW3430 improve social recognition and 
elevate extracellular ACh levels in FCX. This profile differentiates MCH1 
receptor antagonists from conventional anxiolytic and antidepressant agents.

DOI: 10.1017/S1461145708008894
PMID: 18466669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
