1. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2008 Jun;29(6):752-8. doi:
10.1111/j.1745-7254.2008.00800.x.

High-throughput screening of novel antagonists on melanin-concentrating hormone 
receptor-1.

Yan JH(1), Li QY, Boutin JA, Renard MP, Ding YX, Hao XJ, Zhao WM, Wang MW.

Author information:
(1)The National Center for Drug Screening and the State Key Laboratory of New 
Drug Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Shanghai 201203, China.

AIM: To find new antagonists on human melanin-concentrating hormone receptor-1 
(MCHR-1) through high-throughput screening (HTS) of a diverse compound library.
METHODS: MCHR-1, [3H]SNAP7941, and FlashBlue G-protein-coupled receptor beads 
were used to measure the receptor-binding activities of various compounds based 
on scintillation proximity assay (SPA) technology. The guanosine 
5'(gamma-[35S]thio) triphosphate ([35S]GTPgammaS) binding assay was subsequently 
applied to functionally characterize the "hits" identified by the HTS campaign.
RESULTS: Of the 48,240 compounds screened with the SPA method, 12 hits were 
confirmed to possess MCHR-1 binding activities, 8 were functionally studied 
subsequently with the [35S]GTPgammaS binding assay, and only 1 compound 
(NC127816) displayed moderate human MCHR-1 binding affinity (Ki=115.7 nmol/L) 
and relatively potent antagonism (KB=23.8 nmol/L). This compound shares a novel 
scaffold (1-ethoxy-2H-2-aza-1-phospha-naphthalene 1-oxide) with 3 other analogs 
in the group.
CONCLUSION: Considering the marked difference in molecular shape and 
electrostatic status between NC127816 and the structures reported elsewhere, we 
anticipate that its derivatives may represent a new class of potent MCHR-1 
modulators.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1745-7254.2008.00800.x
PMID: 18501123 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
