1. Cell Signal. 2008 Nov;20(11):2084-94. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2008.07.019. Epub
 2008 Aug 8.

Regulation of melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 signaling by RGS8 with 
the receptor third intracellular loop.

Miyamoto-Matsubara M(1), Saitoh O, Maruyama K, Aizaki Y, Saito Y.

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Integrated Arts and Sciences, Hiroshima University, 
Kagamiyama, Hiroshima 739-8521, Japan.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) receptor 1 (MCH1R) belongs to the class A G 
protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs). The MCH-MCH1R system plays a central role in 
energy metabolism, and thus the regulation of signaling pathways activated by 
this receptor is of particular interest. Regulator of G protein signaling (RGS) 
proteins work by increasing the GTPase activity of G protein alpha subunits and 
attenuate cellular responses coupled with G proteins. Recent evidence has shown 
that RGS proteins are not simple G protein regulators but equally inhibit the 
signaling from various GPCRs. Here, we demonstrate that RGS8, which is highly 
expressed in the brain, functions as a negative modulator of MCH1R signaling. By 
using biochemical approaches, RGS8 was found to selectively and directly bind to 
the third intracellular (i3) loop of MCH1R in vitro. When expressed in HEK293T 
cells, RGS8 and MCH1R colocalized to the plasma membrane and RGS8 potently 
inhibited the calcium mobilization induced by MCH. The N-terminal 9 amino acids 
of RGS8 were required for the optimal capacity to downregulate the receptor 
signaling. Furthermore, Arg(253) and Arg(256) at the distal end of the i3 loop 
were found to comprise a structurally important site for the functional 
interaction with RGS8, since coexpression of RGS8 with R253Q/R256Q mutant 
receptors resulted in a loss of induction of MCH-stimulated calcium 
mobilization. This functional association suggests that RGS8 may represent a new 
therapeutic target for the development of novel pharmaceutical agents.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2008.07.019
PMID: 18760349 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
