1. J Neurosci. 2008 Sep 10;28(37):9101-10. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1766-08.2008.

Regulation of synaptic efficacy in hypocretin/orexin-containing neurons by 
melanin concentrating hormone in the lateral hypothalamus.

Rao Y(1), Lu M, Ge F, Marsh DJ, Qian S, Wang AH, Picciotto MR, Gao XB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics/Gynecology and Reproductive Science, Yale University 
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

The lateral hypothalamus (LH) is a central hub that integrates inputs from, and 
sends outputs to, many other brain areas. Two groups of neurons in the LH, 
expressing hypocretin/orexin or melanin concentrating hormone (MCH), have been 
shown to participate in sleep regulation, energy homeostasis, drug addiction, 
motor regulation, stress response, and social behaviors. The elucidation of 
crosstalk between these two systems is essential to understand these behaviors 
and functions because there is evidence that there are reciprocal innervations 
between hypocretin/orexin and MCH neurons. In this study, we used MCH receptor-1 
knock-out (MCHR1 KO) and wild-type (WT) mice expressing green fluorescent 
protein in hypocretin/orexin-containing neurons to examine the hypothesis that 
MCH modulates hypocretin/orexin-mediated effects on behavioral state and 
synaptic transmission in the LH. In MCHR1 KO mice, the efficacy of glutamatergic 
synapses on hypocretin/orexin neurons is potentiated and hypocretin-1-induced 
action potential firing is facilitated, potentially explaining an increased 
effect of modafinil observed in MCHR1 KO mice. In wild-type mice with intact 
MCHR1 signaling, MCH significantly attenuated the hypocretin-1-induced 
enhancement of spike frequency in hypocretin/orexin neurons. The MCH effect was 
dose dependent, pertussis toxin sensitive, and was abolished in MCHR1 KO mice. 
Consistent with this effect, MCH attenuated hypocretin-1-induced enhancement of 
the frequency of miniature EPSCs in hypocretin/orexin neurons. These data from 
MCHR1 KO and WT mice demonstrate a novel interaction between these two systems, 
implying that MCH may exert a unique inhibitory influence on hypocretin/orexin 
signaling as a way to fine-tune the output of the LH.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1766-08.2008
PMCID: PMC2562258
PMID: 18784290 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
