1. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2009 Jan;328(1):165-73. doi: 10.1124/jpet.108.143495.
Epub  2008 Oct 10.

The role of melanin-concentrating hormone-1 receptors in the voiding reflex in 
rats.

Hegde LG(1), Ping XL, Jochnowitz N, Craig DA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Target Discovery and Assessment, Lundbeck Research USA, Inc., 
215 College Road, Paramus, NJ 07652-1431, USA.

We have used the selective melanin-concentrating hormone-1 (MCH(1)) receptor 
antagonist SNAP 7941 [((+)-methyl 
(4S)-3-{[(3-{4-[3-(acetylamino)phenyl]-1-piperidinyl}propyl) 
amino]carbonyl}-4-(3,4-difluorophenyl)-6-(methoxymethyl)-2-oxo-1,2,3,4-tetrahydro-5-pyrimidinecarboxylate 
hydrochloride)] to investigate the role of the hypothalamic neuropeptide MCH in 
the control of voiding in rats. Intravenous administration of SNAP 7941 (3 and 
10 mg/kg i.v.) produced dose-related inhibition of rhythmic, distension-induced 
voiding contractions in anesthetized rats. In conscious rats in which repeated 
voiding cycles were evoked by continuous slow transvesicular infusion of saline, 
intragastric SNAP 7941 [0.03-1 mg/kg intragastrically (i.g.)] produced sustained 
increases in infusion capacity (maximum = 220% basal), comparable with the 
effects of the 5-hydroxytryptamine(1A) antagonist WAY 100635 
(N-[2-[4-(2-methoxyphenyl)-1-piperazinyl]ethyl]-N-2-pyridinyl-cyclohexanecarboxamide 
maleate salt), and the muscarinic antagonist, oxybutynin 
(4-diethylaminobut-2-ynyl 2-cyclohexyl-2-hydroxy-2-phenylacetate hydrochloride). 
SNAP 7941 produced similar results when administered at a low dose (0.01 nmol) 
into the lateral ventricle (intracerebroventricular). The opposite effect was 
produced when MCH (20 nmol) was delivered intracerebroventricularly, resulting 
in a 34% decrease in apparent bladder capacity with increased urinary frequency. 
The effect of MCH was blocked by the prior intragastric administration of SNAP 
7941 (0.1 mg/kg), but oxybutynin (1 mg/kg) was ineffective. Finally, in 
conscious spontaneously hypertensive rats, SNAP 7941 (0.1 mg/kg i.g.) produced a 
31% reduction in micturition frequency, accompanied by a 36% increase in bladder 
capacity, with no effect on total volume voided over 6 h. The data indicate that 
MCH acts via MCH(1) receptors within the CNS to modulate the voiding reflex in 
rats. The striking effects of the MCH(1) antagonist SNAP 7941 to increase 
bladder capacity and reduce voiding frequency indicate that MCH(1) antagonists 
may offer a potential novel approach for treating overactive bladder syndrome.

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.108.143495
PMID: 18849359 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
