1. Eur J Pharmacol. 2008 Dec 3;599(1-3):72-80. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2008.09.027.
 Epub 2008 Sep 30.

Amphetamine- and cocaine-induced conditioned place preference and concomitant 
psychomotor sensitization in mice with genetically inactivated 
melanin-concentrating hormone MCH(1) receptor.

Tyhon A(1), Lakaye B, Adamantidis A, Tirelli E.

Author information:
(1)Centre de Neurosciences Cognitives et Comportementales (CNCC), Université de 
Liège, Belgium.

The melanin-concentrating hormone MCH(1) receptor has been proposed to exert an 
inhibitory control on monoaminergic (especially dopaminergic) activity within 
the mesolimbic system, which underpins drug seeking and reward. That hypothesis 
predicts that an inactivation of these receptors should enhance the sensitivity 
to drug rewarding effects. To test that prediction, we examined the propensity 
of mice lacking the melanin-concentrating receptor (MCH(1) KO) and their intact 
counterparts (WT) to form cocaine- and amphetamine-induced conditioned place 
preference. The conditioned rewarding effects induced by 0.375, 0.75, 1.5 and 3 
mg/kg amphetamine were assessed in two sub-experiments and those induced by 1, 
2, 4 and 8 mg/kg cocaine in two other sub-experiments. All mice were tested 
under saline for place preference 24 h following four every-other-day 
conditioning trials and an initial pre-conditioning session under saline. Most 
of the cocaine and amphetamine doses induced place preference, but without any 
genotype difference being revealed. Also, none of the cocaine doses induced 
psychomotor sensitization during conditioning, whereas amphetamine generated 
clear-cut dose-dependent sensitization in both genotypes. Albeit MCH(1) KO mice 
exhibited higher levels of psychomotor activation, the rates of sensitization 
were comparable across genotypes at 1.5 and 3 mg/kg amphetamine. Moreover, 0.375 
and especially 0.75 mg/kg amphetamine produced a slight but yet significant 
sensitization in MCH(1) KO but not in their WT counterparts. Despite such an 
effect, the results cannot be considered as unambiguously supportive of the 
tested prediction.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2008.09.027
PMID: 18848539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
