1. Eur J Pharmacol. 2009 Jan 5;602(1):66-72. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2008.10.051. 
Epub 2008 Nov 6.

The MCH1 receptor antagonist SNAP 94847 induces sensitivity to dopamine D2/D3 
receptor agonists in rats and mice.

Marsteller DA(1), Gerald CP, Kong R, Cajina M, Craig DA, Swanson CJ.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
3615 Civic Center Boulevard, Abramson Building, Rm 918, Philadelphia, PA 19104, 
USA.

Antidepressant treatment of two or more weeks in rats has been shown to enhance 
the locomotor-stimulating effects of dopamine D(2)/D(3) receptor agonists. This 
action has been attributed to an increased sensitivity of postsynaptic dopamine 
receptors in the nucleus accumbens, thought to represent an essential mechanism 
by which antidepressants act therapeutically to enhance reward and motivation. 
We tested whether the melanin-concentrating hormone receptor(1) (MCH(1)) 
antagonist SNAP 94847, reported to have antidepressant-like activity in several 
preclinical behavioral models, mimics this key feature of established 
antidepressants. Locomotor responses to the dopamine D(2)/D(3) agonist 
quinpirole following acute or chronic administration of fluoxetine (18 
mg/kg/day) or SNAP 94847 (20 mg/kg/day) were assessed in habituated 
Sprague-Dawley rats, as well as BALB/c and CD-1 mice. Rats showed a significant 
increase in quinpirole-induced locomotor activity following chronic (2 weeks), 
but not acute (1 h) fluoxetine or SNAP 94847 administration. BALB/c mice treated 
for 21 days with fluoxetine or SNAP 94847 showed marked increases in 
quinpirole-induced locomotor activity, with the onset of hyper-locomotion 
appearing earlier in the time course after SNAP 94847 compared to fluoxetine. 
Administration of either compound for 7 days was also sufficient to augment the 
quinpirole response in BALB/c mice. Fluoxetine and SNAP 94847 (21 days) failed 
to modify quinpirole responses in CD-1 mice, and the compounds were ineffective 
after acute administration in both mouse strains. This report demonstrates in 
two rodent species that chronic treatment with an MCH(1) receptor antagonist, as 
with clinically proven antidepressants, produces sensitization to the locomotor 
effects of dopamine D(2)/D(3) agonists.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2008.10.051
PMID: 19027732 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
