1. Eur J Med Chem. 2009 Jun;44(6):2583-96. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2009.01.031.
Epub  2009 Feb 5.

Homology modeling of MCH1 receptor and validation by docking/scoring and 
protein-aligned CoMFA.

Abu-Hammad A(1), Zalloum WA, Zalloum H, Abu-Sheikha G, Taha MO.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of 
Jordan, Queen Rania St, Amman, Jordan.

Homology modeling is becoming a valid method for obtaining three-dimensional 
coordinates for proteins. However, it is hard to judge the qualities of the 
resulting models warranting robust subsequent validations. In an attempt to 
evaluate the quality of Melanin-concentrating hormone 1 receptor (MCH1R) 
homology models, a number of homology structures were scanned for potential 
binding cavities. Subsequently, a group of 35 benzylpiperidines' MCH1R 
inhibitors were docked into each of the proposed binding sites via four 
different scoring functions. The docked structures were utilized to construct 
corresponding protein-aligned comparative molecular field analysis (CoMFA) 
models by employing probe-based (H(+), OH, CH(3)) energy grids and genetic 
partial least squares (G/PLS) statistical analysis. The docking-based alignment 
succeeded in accessing self-consistent CoMFA models upon employing JAIN scoring 
function in one of the proposed binding pockets in a particular homology model. 
Furthermore, a ligand-based pharmacophore model was developed for the same set 
of inhibitors and was found to agree with the successful docking configuration. 
Therefore, we proved that the overall procedure of docking, scoring, and CoMFA 
evaluation can be a useful tool to validate homology models, which can be of 
value for structure-based design, in-silico screening, and in understanding the 
structural basis of ligand binding to MCH1R.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2009.01.031
PMID: 19250717 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
