1. Peptides. 2009 Nov;30(11):1990-6. doi: 10.1016/j.peptides.2009.04.010. Epub
2009  May 4.

Molecular cloning and expression of two melanin-concentrating hormone receptors 
in goldfish.

Mizusawa K(1), Saito Y, Wang Z, Kobayashi Y, Matsuda K, Takahashi A.

Author information:
(1)Kitasato University, Sanriku, Ofunato, Iwate, Japan. 
mizusawa@kitasato-u.ac.jp

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a neurohypophysial hormone and induces 
melanin aggregation in the skin in teleosts. MCH also has multiple roles in the 
central regulation of food intake in teleosts and mammals. MCH receptors (MCH-R) 
are among type I G-protein-coupled receptors. Here, we cloned two MCH receptors 
from goldfish, Carassius auratus. The amino acid sequence of goldfish MCH-R1 had 
57-88% homology with fish MCH-R1 and 49-50% homology with mammalian MCH-R1, 
while the amino acid sequence of goldfish MCH-R2 had 72-92% homology with fish 
MCH-R2 and 32% homology with human MCH-R2. Phylogenetic analysis showed that 
these two MCH-Rs are orthologous to the respective mammalian MCH-Rs. The common 
amino acid residues for ligand binding, signal transduction, and receptor 
conformation were well conserved in these receptors, although some intracellular 
basic-amino-acid-rich domains, which have been shown to exist in human MCH-R1 
and MCH-R2, were absent in goldfish MCH-R2. When stably expressed in HEK293 
cells, both goldfish MCH-R1 and MCH-R2 displayed a strong, dose-dependent, 
transient elevation of intracellular calcium in response to salmon MCH 
(EC(50)=0.8nM and 31.8nM, respectively). In contrast to goldfish MCH-R2, 
goldfish MCH-R1 signaling is not sensitive to pertussis toxin, suggesting an 
exclusive Galphaq coupling of goldfish MCH-R1 in the mammalian cell-based assay. 
Reverse transcriptase PCR revealed that both MCH-R1 and MCH-R2 mRNA are 
distributed in various tissues in goldfish. The various tissues including the 
brain and skin express both MCH-R1 and MCH-R2. These results suggest that these 
functional receptors mediate multiple effects of MCH in goldfish.

DOI: 10.1016/j.peptides.2009.04.010
PMID: 19397943 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
