1. Peptides. 2009 May;30(5):974-81. doi: 10.1016/j.peptides.2009.01.017. Epub
2009  Jan 30.

Distinct roles of the DRY motif in rat melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 
in signaling control.

Aizaki Y(1), Maruyama K, Nakano-Tetsuka M, Saito Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Saitama Medical School of Medicine, Iruma-gun, 
Saitama, Japan.

Rhodopsin family (class A) G protein-coupled receptors possess common key 
residues or motifs that appear to be important for receptor function. To clarify 
the roles of the highly conserved amino acid triplet 
Asp(3.49)-Arg(3.50)-Tyr(3.51) (DRY motif), we examined how single-substitution 
mutations of the amino acids in the motif influenced specific features of rat 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCH1R) activity. Substitution of 
either Asp140(3.49) or Tyr142(3.51) to Ala resulted in nonfunctional receptors, 
despite the retention of apparent potencies for agonist binding. These 
loss-of-function phenotypes may be caused by the lack of stimulation for GDP-GTP 
exchange observed in GTPgammaS-binding assays. On the other hand, substitution 
of Arg141(3.50) to Ala caused a 4-fold reduction in the agonist binding affinity 
and, concomitantly, a rightward shift of the dose-dependency curve for calcium 
mobilization and inhibition of cyclic AMP production. Although many experimental 
studies have suggested that the DRY motif is involved in maintaining the 
receptor in its ground state, none of the DRY motif substitutions to Ala in 
MCH1R led to constitutive activation, in terms of the basal signaling level for 
ERK1/2 activation or GTPgammaS binding. These data suggest that the major 
contribution of the DRY motif in MCH1R is to govern receptor conformation and G 
protein coupling/recognition.

DOI: 10.1016/j.peptides.2009.01.017
PMID: 19428776 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
