1. Schizophr Res. 2009 Sep;113(2-3):259-67. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2009.05.014.
Epub  2009 Jun 6.

Two complex genotypes relevant to the kynurenine pathway and melanotropin 
function show association with schizophrenia and bipolar disorder.

Miller CL(1), Murakami P, Ruczinski I, Ross RG, Sinkus M, Sullivan B, Leonard S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21227, USA. 
CMiller@Millerbio.com

Prior studies of mRNA expression, protein expression, and pathway metabolite 
levels have implicated dysregulation of the kynurenine pathway in the etiology 
of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. Here we investigate whether genes 
involved in kynurenine pathway regulation might interact with genes that respond 
to kynurenine metabolites, to enhance risk for these psychiatric phenotypes. 
Candidate genes were selected from prior studies of genetic association, gene 
expression profiling and animal models. A single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) 
in each of six genes, TDO2, HM74, HM74A, MCHR1, MCHR2 and MC5R, was tested for 
association with phenotype (475 Caucasians, 88 African Americans with 
schizophrenia; 97 Caucasians, 3 African Americans with bipolar disorder; 191 
Caucasian, 49 African American controls). An A allele in HM74 was significantly 
associated with schizophrenia and with schizophrenia plus bipolar disorder 
combined, odds ratios (OR) of 1.48, p=0.011 and 1.50, p=0.007, respectively. 
Augmentation of disease risk was found for the complex genotype 
HM74[A,any]+MCHR1[T,any]+MCHR2[C,any] which conferred an OR maximal for the 
combined diagnostic category of schizophrenia plus bipolar disorder (1.70, 
p=0.003), carried by 30% of the cases. TDO2[CC]+MC5R[G, any]+MCHR2[GC] conferred 
an OR maximal for schizophrenia alone (4.84, p=0.005), carried by 8% of 
schizophrenia cases. The combined risk posed by these related, complex genotypes 
is greater than any identified single locus and may derive from co-regulation of 
the kynurenine pathway by interacting genes, a lack of adequate 
melanotropin-controlled sequestration of the kynurenine-derived pigments, or the 
production of melanotropin receptor ligands through kynurenine metabolism.

DOI: 10.1016/j.schres.2009.05.014
PMCID: PMC2855687
PMID: 19502010 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
