1. Peptides. 2009 Nov;30(11):2014-24. doi: 10.1016/j.peptides.2009.06.015. Epub 
2009 Jun 21.

Melanin-concentrating hormone induces neurite outgrowth in human neuroblastoma 
SH-SY5Y cells through p53 and MAPKinase signaling pathways.

Cotta-Grand N(1), Rovère C, Guyon A, Cervantes A, Brau F, Nahon JL.

Author information:
(1)The Institut de Pharmacologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Centre National de 
la Recherche Scientifique and Université Nice-Sophia Antipolis, Valbonne, 
France.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) peptide plays a major role in energy 
homeostasis regulation. Little is known about cellular functions engaged by 
endogenous MCH receptor (MCH-R1). Here, MCH-R1 mRNA and cognate protein were 
found expressed in human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells. Electrophysiological 
experiments demonstrated that MCH modulated K(+) currents, an effect depending 
upon the time of cellular growth. MCH treatments induced a transient 
phosphorylation of MAPKinases, abolished by PD98059, and partially blocked by 
PTX, suggesting a Galphai/Galphao protein contribution. MCH stimulated 
expression and likely nuclear localization of phosphorylated p53 proteins, an 
effect fully dependent upon MAPKinase activities. MCH treatment also increased 
phosphorylation of Elk-1 and up-regulated Egr-1, two transcriptional factors 
targeted by the MAPKinase pathway. Finally, MCH provoked neurite outgrowth after 
24h-treatment of neuroblastoma cells. This effect and transcriptional factors 
activation were partly prevented by PD98059. Collectively, our results provide 
the first evidence for a role of MCH in neuronal differentiation of endogenously 
MCH-R1-expressing cells via non-exclusive MAPKinase and p53 signaling pathways.

DOI: 10.1016/j.peptides.2009.06.015
PMID: 19540893 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
