1. Eur J Pharmacol. 2009 Aug 15;616(1-3):101-6. doi:
10.1016/j.ejphar.2009.06.009.  Epub 2009 Jun 18.

Localisation of melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 in rat brain and 
evidence that sleep parameters are not altered despite high central receptor 
occupancy.

Able SL(1), Ivarsson M, Fish RL, Clarke TL, McCourt C, Duckworth JM, Napier C, 
Katugampola SD.

Author information:
(1)Pfizer Global Research and Development, Sandwich, Kent, UK. 
sarah.able@pfizer.com

The present study describes the optimisation of an autoradiography assay that 
provides a means to measure the in vitro potency of melanin-concentrating 
hormone receptor 1 (MCH(1)) antagonists in native tissues and their ex vivo 
receptor occupancy. Initial localisation studies demonstrated that the MCH(1) 
receptor radioligand [(125)I]-S36057 bound to rat caudate putamen with specific 
binding of consistently >60%. In vitro, the MCH(1) receptor antagonists GW3430, 
SNAP-94847 and 4'-{[1-(cyclopropylmethyl)piperidin-4-ylidene] 
[5-fluoro-6-(trifluoromethyl)-1H-benzimidazol-2-yl]methyl}biphenyl-3-carbonitrile 
(referred to as Compound A) exhibited concentration dependent inhibition of the 
specific binding of [(125)I]-S36057, with a rank order of affinity of 
SNAP-94847>Compound A>GW3430. In an ex vivo occupancy assay, Compound A dosed 
orally to rats caused a concentration dependent inhibition of the specific 
binding of [(125)I]-S36057 to rat caudate putamen. The occupancy reached 
87+/-11% at 30 mg/kg and the estimated ED(50) was 9.3 mg/kg, which was 
equivalent to a free plasma concentration of 40 nM. As MCH has been reported to 
play a role in the regulation of the sleep cycle, the effect of Compound A on 
sleep parameters was investigated. However Compound A, at exposures that 
achieved near maximal receptor occupancy, failed to demonstrate any effects on 
the sleep/wake pattern in telemetered rats. We conclude that our ex vivo 
receptor occupancy assay is suitable for selecting centrally penetrant MCH(1) 
receptor antagonists and that, despite high levels of receptor occupancy, the 
selective MCH(1) receptor antagonist Compound A failed to elicit any changes in 
sleep electroencephalogram (EEG) parameters.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2009.06.009
PMID: 19540226 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
