1. Behav Brain Res. 2010 Feb 11;207(1):14-20. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2009.09.032.
Epub  2009 Sep 27.

Additive effects of olanzapine and melanin-concentrating hormone agonism on 
energy balance.

Guesdon B(1), Denis RG, Richard D.

Author information:
(1)Centre de recherche de l'Institut de cardiologie et de pneumologie de Québec 
(Hôpital Laval) et Centre de recherche sur le métabolisme énergétique de 
l'Université Laval, 2725 chemin Sainte-Foy, Québec, Canada.

Atypical antipsychotic drugs (AAPDs) induce hyperphagia and body weight gain as 
a deleterious side effect. However, the mechanism whereby these drugs affect the 
neuronal pathways regulating energy balance has yet to be fully elucidated. The 
present study was conducted to investigate the respective and interaction 
effects of olanzapine and agonism of the melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) 
receptor (MCHR1) on body weight, food intake, adiposity and expressions of genes 
liable of being involved in the anabolic action of AAPDs and MCH agonism. MCH is 
a hypothalamic neuropeptide, which exerts stimulating effects on food intake and 
body weight gain. Male Wistar rats received olanzapine (1 mg/kg of rat/day per 
os) and/or an intracerebroventricular (ICV) infusion of a MCHR1 agonist (30 
microg/rat/day) during 13 days. Food intake and body weight were recorded daily, 
whereas adipose tissue depots were weighed at day 13. At the end of the 
experiment, we also measured brain levels of the messengers RNAs (mRNAs) 
encoding for MCH, MCHR1, neuropeptides-Y (NPY) and agouti-related peptide (AgRP) 
using in situ hybridization. The 13-day treatments combining olanzapine and the 
MCHR1 agonist exerted additive effects in enhancing food intake and adiposity. 
Consistently, each treatment differently affected brain expression of genes 
influencing energy balance. While the MCHR1 agonist treatment increased NPY mRNA 
expression in the hypothalamic arcuate nucleus, olanzapine treatment 
specifically increased MCHR1 mRNA expression in the nucleus accumbens shell 
(NAcSh). AAPDs and MCH agonism exert additive effects on energy balance and 
selective effects on the brain expression of energy balance-related genes.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2009.09.032
PMID: 19788900 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
