1. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2010 Jul;299(1):G63-9. doi: 
10.1152/ajpgi.00059.2010. Epub 2010 Apr 29.

Expression of cannabinoid CB1 receptors by vagal afferent neurons: kinetics and 
role in influencing neurochemical phenotype.

Burdyga G(1), Varro A, Dimaline R, Thompson DG, Dockray GJ.

Author information:
(1)Physiological Laboratory, School of Biomedical Sciences, Univ. of Liverpool, 
Liverpool, L69 3BX, UK.

The intestinal hormone cholecystokinin (CCK) inhibits food intake via 
stimulation of vagal afferent neurons (VAN). Recent studies suggest that CCK 
also regulates the expression of some G protein-coupled receptors and 
neuropeptide transmitters in these neurons. The aim of the present study was to 
characterize the expression of cannabinoid (CB)1 receptors in VAN and to 
determine whether stimulation of these receptors plays a role in regulating 
neurochemical phenotype. Expression of CB1 in rat VAN was detectable by in situ 
hybridization or immunohistochemistry after 6 h of fasting and increased to a 
maximum after 24 h when approximately 50% of neurons in the mid and caudal 
regions expressed the receptor. Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH)1 receptors 
also increased with fasting, but the changes were delayed compared with CB1; in 
contrast Y2 receptors (Y2R) exhibited reciprocal changes in expression to CB1. 
Administration of CCK8s (10 nmol ip) to fasted rats decreased expression of CB1 
with a t(1/2) of approximately 1 h compared with 3 h for MCH1. The action of 
CCK8s was inhibited by ghrelin and orexin-A. The CB1 agonist anandamide 
(intraperitoneally) reversed the effect of CCK8s on CB1, MCH1, and Y2 receptor 
expression. In contrast, in rats fasted for 18 h, administration of a CB1 
antagonist/inverse agonist (AM281 ip) downregulated CB1 expression and increased 
Y2 receptor expression. Activation of vagal CB1 receptors therefore influences 
the neurochemical phenotype of these neurons, indicating a new and hitherto 
unrecognized role for endocannabinoids in gut-brain signaling.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpgi.00059.2010
PMCID: PMC2904113
PMID: 20430875 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
