1. J Neurosci. 2010 Jun 16;30(24):8263-73. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5858-09.2010.

Regulation of nucleus accumbens activity by the hypothalamic neuropeptide 
melanin-concentrating hormone.

Sears RM(1), Liu RJ, Narayanan NS, Sharf R, Yeckel MF, Laubach M, Aghajanian GK, 
DiLeone RJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Ribicoff Research Facilities, Yale University 
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06508, USA.

The lateral hypothalamus and the nucleus accumbens shell (AcbSh) are brain 
regions important for food intake. The AcbSh contains high levels of receptor 
for melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH), a lateral hypothalamic peptide critical 
for feeding and metabolism. MCH receptor (MCHR1) activation in the AcbSh 
increases food intake, while AcbSh MCHR1 blockade reduces feeding. Here 
biochemical and cellular mechanisms of MCH action in the rodent AcbSh are 
described. A reduction of phosphorylation of GluR1 at serine 845 (pSer(845)) is 
shown to occur after both pharmacological and genetic manipulations of MCHR1 
activity. These changes depend upon signaling through G(i/o), and result in 
decreased surface expression of GluR1-containing AMPA receptors (AMPARs). 
Electrophysiological analysis of medium spiny neurons (MSNs) in the AcbSh 
revealed decreased amplitude of AMPAR-mediated synaptic events (mEPSCs) with MCH 
treatment. In addition, MCH suppressed action potential firing MSNs through K(+) 
channel activation. Finally, in vivo recordings confirmed that MCH reduces 
neuronal cell firing in the AcbSh in freely moving animals. The ability of MCH 
to reduce cell firing in the AcbSh is consistent with a general model from other 
pharmacological and electrophysiological studies whereby reduced AcbSh neuronal 
firing leads to food intake. The current work integrates the hypothalamus into 
this model, providing biochemical and cellular mechanisms whereby metabolic and 
limbic signals converge to regulate food intake.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5858-09.2010
PMCID: PMC2907886
PMID: 20554878 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
