1. J Neurophysiol. 2010 Sep;104(3):1417-25. doi: 10.1152/jn.01052.2009. Epub 2010
 Jun 30.

Major impairments of glutamatergic transmission and long-term synaptic 
plasticity in the hippocampus of mice lacking the melanin-concentrating hormone 
receptor-1.

Pachoud B(1), Adamantidis A, Ravassard P, Luppi PH, Grisar T, Lakaye B, Salin 
PA.

Author information:
(1)Unité Mixte de Recherche 5167 du Centre National de la Recherche 
Scientifique, Institut Fédératif des Neurosciences de Lyon (IFR19), Université 
Claude, Lyon, France.

The hypothalamic neuropeptide melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) plays 
important roles in energy homeostasis, anxiety, and sleep regulation. Since the 
MCH receptor-1 (MCH-R1), the only functional receptor that mediates MCH 
functions in rodents, facilitates behavioral performance in 
hippocampus-dependent learning tasks, we investigated whether glutamatergic 
transmission in CA1 pyramidal cells could be modulated in mice lacking the 
MCH-R1 gene (MCH-R1(-/-)). We found that both 
α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) and 
N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor-mediated transmissions were diminished in 
the mutant mice compared with their controls. This deficit was explained, at 
least in part, by a postsynaptic down-regulation of these receptors since the 
amplitude of miniature excitatory postsynaptic currents and the NMDA/AMPA ratio 
were decreased. Long-term synaptic potentiation (LTP) was also impaired in 
MCH-R1(-/-) mice. This was due to an altered induction, rather than an impaired, 
expression because repeating the induction stimulus restored LTP to a normal 
magnitude. In addition, long-term synaptic depression was strongly diminished in 
MCH-R1(-/-) mice. These results suggest that MCH exerts a facilitatory effect on 
CA1 glutamatergic synaptic transmission and long-term synaptic plasticity. 
Recently, it has been shown that MCH neurons fire exclusively during sleep and 
mainly during rapid eye movement sleep. Thus these findings provide a mechanism 
by which sleep might facilitate memory consolidation.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.01052.2009
PMCID: PMC4073994
PMID: 20592115 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
