1. Eur J Med Chem. 2010 Oct;45(10):4509-22. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2010.07.011.
Epub  2010 Jul 16.

Three-dimensional quantitative structure-activity relationship CoMSIA/CoMFA and 
LeapFrog studies on novel series of bicyclo [4.1.0] heptanes derivatives as 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptor R1 antagonists.

Morales-Bayuelo A(1), Ayazo H, Vivas-Reyes R.

Author information:
(1)Grupo de Química Cuántica y Teórica, Universidad de Cartagena, Programa de 
Química, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, Cartagena, Colombia.

Comparative molecular similarity indices analysis (CoMSIA) and comparative 
molecular field analysis (CoMFA) were performed on a series of bicyclo [4.1.0] 
heptanes derivatives as melanin-concentrating hormone receptor R1 antagonists 
(MCHR1 antagonists). Molecular superimposition of antagonists on the template 
structure was performed by database alignment method. The statistically 
significant model was established on sixty five molecules, which were validated 
by a test set of ten molecules. The CoMSIA model yielded the best predictive 
model with a q(2) = 0.639, non cross-validated R(2) of 0.953, F value of 92.802, 
bootstrapped R(2) of 0.971, standard error of prediction = 0.402, and standard 
error of estimate = 0.146 while the CoMFA model yielded a q(2) = 0.680, non 
cross-validated R(2) of 0.922, F value of 114.351, bootstrapped R(2) of 0.925, 
standard error of prediction = 0.364, and standard error of estimate = 0.180. 
CoMFA analysis maps were employed for generating a pseudo cavity for LeapFrog 
calculation. The contour maps obtained from 3D-QSAR studies were appraised for 
activity trends for the molecules analyzed. The results show the variability of 
steric and electrostatic contributions that determine the activity of the MCHR1 
antagonist, with these results we proposed new antagonists that may be more 
potent than previously reported, these novel antagonists were designed from the 
addition of highly electronegative groups in the substituent di(i-C(3)H(7))N- of 
the bicycle [4.1.0] heptanes, using the model CoMFA which also was used for the 
molecular design using the technique LeapFrog. The data generated from the 
present study will further help to design novel, potent, and selective MCHR1 
antagonists.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2010.07.011
PMID: 20691511 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
