1. Neurosci Lett. 2010 Oct 29;484(2):104-7. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2010.08.018.
Epub  2010 Aug 13.

Mice lacking Melanin Concentrating Hormone 1 receptor are resistant to seizures.

Parks GS(1), Okumura SM, Gohil K, Civelli O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental and Cell Biology, University of California, 
Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA.

The Melanin Concentrating Hormone (MCH) system is widely expressed throughout 
the central nervous system and regulates a variety of physiological functions. 
It has been reported that acute central administration of MCH inhibits 
pentylenetetrazol (PTZ)-induced seizures in rats. In the present study MCH(1) 
receptor knockout mice (MCH(1)R-KO) were used to investigate the role of MCH 
signaling in modulating seizure susceptibility. Seizure behaviors were compared 
between MCH(1)R-KO and wild type (MCH(1)R-WT) mice following administration of 
the convulsant compounds PTZ or pilocarpine. PTZ injection induced clonic 
seizures in MCH(1)R-WT mice but failed to induce them in MCH(1)R-KO mice. More 
than twice as many injections of intermittently administered low dose PTZ were 
required to induce clonic seizures in MCH(1)R-KO mice than in MCH(1)R-WT mice. 
Following pilocarpine injection, MCH(1)R-WT mice experienced clonic seizures and 
most had tonic seizures and entered status epilepticus, while all MCH(1)R-KO 
mice were completely resistant to these effects. MCH(1)R-KO mice were also 
observed to be strongly protected from the development of PTZ kindling. Genetic 
deletion of MCH(1)R conferred resistance to all seizure models tested in this 
study. The data indicate that the MCH system is involved in the regulation of 
PTZ and pilocarpine seizure threshold.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2010.08.018
PMCID: PMC2943056
PMID: 20709149 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
