1. Behav Brain Res. 2011 Apr 15;218(2):259-66. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2010.10.035.
Epub  2010 Nov 4.

Depressive-like profile induced by MCH microinjections into the dorsal raphe 
nucleus evaluated in the forced swim test.

Lagos P(1), Urbanavicius J, Scorza MC, Miraballes R, Torterolo P.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Fisiología, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de la 
República, General Flores 2125, 11800 Montevideo, Uruguay.

Antagonism of the melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) receptor 1 (MCH-R1) has 
been recently shown to have antidepressant-like profile in rats. However, the 
mechanisms by which the MCHergic system participates in the modulation of 
emotional states are still to be determined. In the present study we confirmed 
the presence of MCHergic fibers within the dorsal raphe nucleus (DRN), a 
serotonergic nucleus involved in the physiopathology of major depression. We 
also assessed the effects of the administration of MCH and anti-MCH antibody 
(immunoneutralization) into the DRN using the forced swim test in rats, an 
animal model to screen antidepressant drugs. We found that a low dose of MCH (50 
ng) evoked a depressive-like behavior indicated by a significant increase in the 
immobility time as well as a decrease in climbing behavior. Furthermore, the 
depressive-like response was prevented by pretreatment with fluoxetine. 
Consistent with these results, the immunoneutralization of MCH produced an 
antidepressant-like effect. By means of the open field test we discarded that 
these effects were related to unspecific changes in motor activity. Our results 
suggest that the MCHergic neurons are involved in the regulation of emotional 
behaviors through the modulation of the serotonergic neuronal activity within 
the DRN. In addition, the present results are in agreement with previous reports 
showing that antagonism of the MCHergic system may be a novel therapeutic 
strategy for the treatment of depressive disorders.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2010.10.035
PMID: 21056060 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
