1. Behav Brain Res. 2011 Mar 17;218(1):42-50. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2010.11.019.
Epub  2010 Nov 11.

Contribution of melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH1) receptor to 
thermoregulation and sleep stabilization: evidence from MCH1 (-/-) mice.

Ahnaou A(1), Dautzenberg FM, Huysmans H, Steckler T, Drinkenburg WH.

Author information:
(1)Janssen Pharmaceutical Companies of Johnson & Johnson, Dept. of 
Neurosciences, A Division of Janssen Pharmaceutica NV, Turnhoutseweg 30, B-2340 
Beerse, Belgium. aahnaou@prd.jnj.com

Recent studies have explored the implication of melanin-concentrating hormone 
(MCH) in the process of vigilance states. The current experiments were carried 
out in mice lacking the MCH(1) receptor (-/-) and wild-type (WT) littermates, to 
assess the role of MCH(1) receptor in the regulation of sleep architecture, body 
temperature (BT) and locomotor activity (LMA) under normal condition and 
following a 1h restraint stress at lights onset. Under baseline conditions, 
MCH(1) (-/-) mice exhibited consistent changes in waking and sleeping time 
across the 24-h recording period. We found an increase in the amount of 
wakefulness (MCH(1) (-/-) 680.1 ± 15.3 min vs. WT, 601.9 ± 18.1, p<0.05) at the 
expense of total duration of non rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep (MCH(1) (-/-) 
664.1 ± 13.9 min vs. WT 750.1 ± 18.5, p<0.05). Additionally, MCH(1) (-/-) mice 
had a higher mean basal body temperature (MCH(1) (-/-), 36.6 ± 0.1°C vs. WT, 
36.0 ± 0.1°C, p<0.05), particularly during the light-resting period. Restraint 
stress resulted in an immediate increase in wakefulness with a concomitant 
reduction in NREM sleep and REM sleep in both genotypes, followed by a 
homeostatic rebound sleep. A concomitant long lasting increase in BT, 
independently of the behavioural state accompanied those changes in both 
genotypes. The elevated basal body temperature and reduction in NREM sleep time 
resulting from shorter NREM episode durations observed in MCH(1) (-/-) suggests 
that central MCH(1) receptor has a role in thermoregulation and presumably 
stabilization of NREM sleep.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2010.11.019
PMID: 21074567 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
