1. J Recept Signal Transduct Res. 2010 Dec;30(6):385-402. doi: 
10.3109/10799893.2010.524223. Epub 2010 Nov 18.

Cellular models for the study of the pharmacology and signaling of 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptors.

Eberle AN(1), Mild G, Zumsteg U.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Endocrinology, Department of Biomedicine, University Hospital 
and University Children's Hospital, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.

Cellular models for the study of the neuropeptide melanin-concentrating hormone 
(MCH) have become indispensable tools for pharmacological profiling and 
signaling analysis of MCH and its synthetic analogues. Although expression of 
MCH receptors is most abundant in the brain, MCH-R(1) is also found in different 
peripheral tissues. Therefore, not only cell lines derived from nervous tissue 
but also from peripheral tissues that naturally express MCH receptors have been 
used to study receptor signaling and regulation. For screening of novel 
compounds, however, heterologous expression of MCH-R(1) or MCH-R(2) genes in 
HEK293, Chinese hamster ovary, COS-7, or 3T3-L1 cells, or amplified MCH-R(1) 
expression/signaling in IRM23 cells transfected with the G(q) protein gene are 
the preferred tools because of more distinct pharmacological effects induced by 
MCH, which include inhibition of cAMP formation, stimulation of inositol 
triphosphate production, increase in intracellular free Ca(2+) and/or activation 
of mitogen-activated protein kinases. Most of the published data originate from 
this type of model system, whereas data based on studies with cell lines 
endogenously expressing MCH receptors are more limited. This review presents an 
update on the different cellular models currently used for the analysis of MCH 
receptor interaction and signaling.

DOI: 10.3109/10799893.2010.524223
PMID: 21083507 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
