1. Exp Dermatol. 2011 Jan;20(1):35-40. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0625.2010.01181.x.

Autoantibodies against tyrosine hydroxylase in patients with non-segmental 
(generalised) vitiligo.

Kemp EH(1), Emhemad S, Akhtar S, Watson PF, Gawkrodger DJ, Weetman AP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Metabolism, School of Medicine, University of Sheffield, 
Sheffield, UK. e.h.kemp@sheffield.ac.uk

Vitiligo is an acquired idiopathic hypomelanotic skin disorder characterised by 
depigmented macules because of loss of cutaneous melanocytes. Although the exact 
cause of vitiligo remains obscure, evidence suggests that autoimmunity plays a 
role in the pathogenesis of the disease. Previously, tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) 
was identified as a putative autoantigen in vitiligo using phage-display 
technology. In this study, the prevalence of TH antibodies in patients with 
vitiligo was investigated. A radioimmunoassay (RIA) was used to detect TH 
antibodies in sera from patients with either non-segmental vitiligo (n=79), 
segmental vitiligo (n=8) or other autoimmune diseases without concomitant 
vitiligo (n=91). Sera from healthy individuals (n=28) were also tested. Patients 
with segmental vitiligo, healthy controls and patients with other autoimmune 
diseases without concomitant vitiligo were all negative for TH antibody 
reactivity. Of 79 patients with non-segmental vitiligo, 18 (23%) were positive 
for TH antibodies in the RIA, and a significant increase in the prevalence of TH 
antibodies in patients with non-segmental vitiligo was evident when compared 
with controls (P=0.003). TH antibody prevalence was also significantly elevated 
in patients with active vitiligo compared to those with stable disease 
(P=0.009). Overall, the results indicate that TH is an antibody target in 
non-segmental but not in segmental vitiligo and that TH antibodies appear to be 
more frequent in patients with active vitiligo.

Â© 2010 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0625.2010.01181.x
PMID: 21158937 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
