1. Int J Mol Med. 2011 May;27(5):725-9. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2011.629. Epub 2011 Feb
 28.

Immunodetection of the MCHR1 antibody in vitiligo patient sera.

Zhou M(1), Guan C, Lin F, Xu W, Fu L, Hong W, Wan Y, Xu A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, the Third People's Hospital of Hangzhou, Hangzhou 
310009, PR China.

Human vitiligo is an acquired depigmenting skin disorder characterized by 
milk-white skin macules resulting from a chronic and progressive loss of 
melanocytes. It has been suggested that autoimmune mechanisms are involved in 
this disorder. We undertook this project to obtain an MCHR1-C linear peptide 
containing four main MCHR1 B-cell epitopes in an attempt to detect the IgG 
antibody against MCHR1 in vitiligo. The target gene encoding the MCHR1-C peptide 
was cloned into a pGEX-4T-2 expression vector, expressed in Escherichia coli 
BL21, and purified using a GST column. The molecular weight was analyzed by 
SDS-PAGE and western blotting. The IgG antibody response to MCHR1 was detected 
by ELISA with MCHR1-C as a coated antigen, and the absorption experiment was 
used to assess the binding ability of the Ab detected by MCHR1-C with a membrane 
protein in human epidermal melanocytes. The purified peptide MCHR1-C with a 
molecular weight of 33 kDa was obtained, and could bind to the MCHR1 antibody in 
human sera. Of the vitiligo patient sera examined, 24 of 145 (16.55%) tested 
positive for the MCHR1 antibody, and the frequency in the vitiligo patient group 
was significantly greater compared to the normal control. However, no 
significant difference between gender, disease duration, clinical subtype or 
family history between the two groups was observed. In addition, the Ab detected 
by MCHR1-C in sera was specifically absorbed by the membrane protein obtained 
from human epidermal melanocytes. Collectively, our data suggest that the 
MCHR1-C peptide can be used to detect the MCHR1 antibody in vitiligo patients as 
a coated antigen instead of MCHR1 protein. We conclude that the level of MCHR1 
antibody in active vitiligo patients is significantly higher than that in 
healthy individuals, while gender, disease duration, clinical subtype and family 
history have no association with the level of MCHR1 antibody in vitiligo 
patients.

DOI: 10.3892/ijmm.2011.629
PMID: 21369690 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
