1. J Chem Inf Model. 2011 Mar 28;51(3):635-46. doi: 10.1021/ci100355c. Epub 2011 
Mar 3.

New insights into the binding mode of melanin concentrating hormone receptor-1 
antagonists: homology modeling and explicit membrane molecular dynamics 
simulation study.

Helal MA(1), Chittiboyina AG, Avery MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, School of Pharmacy, University of 
Mississippi, University, Mississippi 38677, United States.

Melanin concentrating hormone (MCH) is a cyclic 19-amino-acid peptide expressed 
mainly in the hypothalamus. It is involved in the control of feeding behavior, 
energy homeostasis, and body weight. Administration of MCH-R1 antagonists has 
been proved to reduce food intake and cause weight loss in animal models. In the 
present study, a homology model of the human MCH-R1 was constructed using the 
crystal structure of bovine rhodopsin (PDB: 1u19) as a template. Based on the 
observation that MCH-R1 can bind ligands of high chemical diversity, the initial 
model was subjected to an extensive ligand-supported refinement using 
antagonists of different chemotypes. The refinement process involved stepwise 
energy minimizations and molecular dynamics simulations. The refined model was 
inserted into a pre-equilibrated DPPC/TIP3P membrane system and then simulated 
for 20 ns in complex with structurally diverse antagonists. This protocol was 
able to explain the SAR of MCH-R1 antagonists with diverse chemical structures. 
Moreover, it reveals new insights into the critical recognition sites within the 
receptor. This work represents the first detailed study of molecular dynamics of 
MCH-R1 inserted into a membrane-aqueous environment.

DOI: 10.1021/ci100355c
PMCID: PMC3090266
PMID: 21370821 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
