1. Front Neurol. 2011 Mar 18;2:14. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2011.00014. eCollection
2011.

Melanin-concentrating hormone: a new sleep factor?

Torterolo P(1), Lagos P, Monti JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, University of the Republic 
Montevideo, Uruguay.

Neurons containing the neuropeptide melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) are 
mainly located in the lateral hypothalamus and the incerto-hypothalamic area, 
and have widespread projections throughout the brain. While the biological 
functions of this neuropeptide are exerted in humans through two metabotropic 
receptors, the MCHR1 and MCHR2, only the MCHR1 is present in rodents. Recently, 
it has been shown that the MCHergic system is involved in the control of sleep. 
We can summarize the experimental findings as follows: (1) The areas related to 
the control of sleep and wakefulness have a high density of MCHergic fibers and 
receptors. (2) MCHergic neurons are active during sleep, especially during rapid 
eye movement (REM) sleep. (3) MCH knockout mice have less REM sleep, notably 
under conditions of negative energy balance. Animals with genetically 
inactivated MCHR1 also exhibit altered vigilance state architecture and sleep 
homeostasis. (4) Systemically administered MCHR1 antagonists reduce sleep. (5) 
Intraventricular microinjection of MCH increases both slow wave sleep (SWS) and 
REM sleep; however, the increment in REM sleep is more pronounced. (6) 
Microinjection of MCH into the dorsal raphe nucleus increases REM sleep time. 
REM seep is inhibited by immunoneutralization of MCH within this nucleus. (7) 
Microinjection of MCH in the nucleus pontis oralis of the cat enhances REM sleep 
time and reduces REM sleep latency. All these data strongly suggest that MCH has 
a potent role in the promotion of sleep. Although both SWS and REM sleep are 
facilitated by MCH, REM sleep seems to be more sensitive to MCH modulation.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2011.00014
PMCID: PMC3080035
PMID: 21516258
