1. Regul Pept. 2011 Aug 8;169(1-3):6-12. doi: 10.1016/j.regpep.2011.04.001. Epub 
2011 May 1.

Signalling pathway of goldfish melanin-concentrating hormone receptors 1 and 2.

Hamamoto A(1), Mizusawa K, Takahashi A, Saito Y.

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Integrated Arts and Sciences, Hiroshima University, 1-7-1 
Kagamiyama, Higashi-hiroshima, Hiroshima 739-8521, Japan.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is the natural ligand for the MCH-1 receptor 
(MCHR1) and MCH-2 receptor (MCHR2). The MCH-MCHR1 system plays a central role in 
energy metabolism in rodents. Recently, we identified MCHR1 and MCHR2 
orthologues in goldfish, designated gfMCHR1 and gfMCHR2. In a mammalian 
cell-based assay, calcium mobilization was evoked by gfMCHR2 via both Gαi/o and 
Gαq, while the gfMCHR1-mediated response was exclusively dependent on Gαq. This 
coupling capacity to G proteins is in contrast to human MCHR1 and MCHR2. Here, 
we extended our previous characterization of the two gfMCHRs by examining their 
different signalling pathway. We found that MCH caused activation of 
extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1 and 2 (ERK1/2) via both gfMCHR1 and 
gfMCHR2 in dose-dependent manners. Unlike the case for gfMCHR2, gfMCHR1 
signalling was not sensitive to pertussis toxin, suggesting Gαq coupling of 
gfMCHR1 in the ERK1/2 pathway as well as a calcium mobilization system. Cyclic 
AMP assays revealed that gfMCHR2 was efficiently coupled to Gαi/o, while gfMCHR1 
was weakly coupled to Gαs. Finally, we investigated the transduction features 
stimulated by two mammalian MCH analogues. As expected, Compound 15, which is a 
full agonist of human MCHR1, was a potent gfMCHR1 agonist in multiple signalling 
pathways. On the other hand, Compound 30, which is a human MCHR1-selective 
antagonist with negligible agonist potency, unexpectedly acted as a selective 
agonist of gfMCHR1. These results are the first to demonstrate that gfMCHR1 and 
gfMCHR2 have quite different signalling properties from human MCHRs.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.regpep.2011.04.001
PMID: 21539863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
