1. PLoS One. 2011;6(5):e17711. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017711. Epub 2011 May
26.

Allele-specific, age-dependent and BMI-associated DNA methylation of human 
MCHR1.

Stepanow S(1), Reichwald K, Huse K, Gausmann U, Nebel A, Rosenstiel P, Wabitsch 
M, Fischer-Posovszky P, Platzer M.

Author information:
(1)Genome Analysis, Leibniz Institute for Age Research, Jena, Germany. 
stepanow@fli-leibniz.de

BACKGROUND: Melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1) plays a significant 
role in regulation of energy balance, food intake, physical activity and body 
weight in humans and rodents. Several association studies for human obesity 
showed contrary results concerning the SNPs rs133072 (G/A) and rs133073 (T/C), 
which localize to the first exon of MCHR1. The variations constitute two main 
haplotypes (GT, AC). Both SNPs affect CpG dinucleotides, whereby each haplotype 
contains a potential methylation site at one of the two SNP positions. In 
addition, 15 CpGs in close vicinity of these SNPs constitute a weak CpG island. 
Here, we studied whether DNA methylation in this sequence context may contribute 
to population- and age-specific effects of MCHR1 alleles in obesity.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We analyzed DNA methylation of a 315 bp region of MCHR1 
encompassing rs133072 and rs133073 and the CpG island in blood samples of 49 
individuals by bisulfite sequencing. The AC haplotype shows a significantly 
higher methylation level than the GT haplotype. This allele-specific methylation 
is age-dependent. In young individuals (20-30 years) the difference in DNA 
methylation between haplotypes is significant; whereas in individuals older than 
60 years it is not detectable. Interestingly, the GT allele shows a decrease in 
methylation status with increasing BMI, whereas the methylation of the AC allele 
is not associated with this phenotype. Heterozygous lymphoblastoid cell lines 
show the same pattern of allele-specific DNA methylation. The cell line, which 
exhibits the highest difference in methylation levels between both haplotypes, 
also shows allele-specific transcription of MCHR1, which can be abolished by 
treatment with the DNA methylase inhibitor 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine.
CONCLUSIONS: We show that DNA methylation at MCHR1 is allele-specific, 
age-dependent, BMI-associated and affects transcription. Conceivably, this 
epigenetic regulation contributes to the age- and/or population specific effects 
reported for MCHR1 in several human obesity studies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017711
PMCID: PMC3102661
PMID: 21637341 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.
