1. mBio. 2011 Jun 21;2(3):e00115-11. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00115-11. Print 2011.

New channelrhodopsin with a red-shifted spectrum and rapid kinetics from 
Mesostigma viride.

Govorunova EG(1), Spudich EN, Lane CE, Sineshchekov OA, Spudich JL.

Author information:
(1)Center for Membrane Biology, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular 
Biology, University of Texas Medical School, Houston, Texas, USA.

Light control of motility behavior (phototaxis and photophobic responses) in 
green flagellate algae is mediated by sensory rhodopsins homologous to 
phototaxis receptors and light-driven ion transporters in prokaryotic organisms. 
In the phototaxis process, excitation of the algal sensory rhodopsins leads to 
generation of transmembrane photoreceptor currents. When expressed in animal 
cells, the algal phototaxis receptors function as light-gated cation channels, 
which has earned them the name "channelrhodopsins." Channelrhodopsins have 
become useful molecular tools for light control of cellular activity. Only four 
channelrhodopsins, identified in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii and Volvox carteri, 
have been reported so far. By screening light-induced currents among algal 
species, we identified that the phylogenetically distant flagellate Mesostigma 
viride showed photoelectrical responses in vivo with properties suggesting a 
channelrhodopsin especially promising for optogenetic use. We cloned an M. 
viride channelrhodopsin, MChR1, and studied its channel activity upon 
heterologous expression. Action spectra in HEK293 cells match those of the 
photocurrents observed in M. viride cells. Comparison of the more divergent 
MChR1 sequence to the previously studied phylogenetically clustered homologs and 
study of several MChR1 mutants refine our understanding of the sequence 
determinants of channelrhodopsin function. We found that MChR1 has the most 
red-shifted and pH-independent spectral sensitivity so far reported, matches or 
surpasses known channelrhodopsins' channel kinetics features, and undergoes 
minimal inactivation upon sustained illumination. This combination of properties 
makes MChR1 a promising candidate for optogenetic applications.

Â© 2011 Govorunova et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00115-11
PMCID: PMC3119535
PMID: 21693637 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
