1. Bioorg Med Chem. 2011 Sep 15;19(18):5539-52. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2011.07.038. 
Epub 2011 Jul 26.

Discovery, synthesis, and structure-activity relationship of 
6-aminomethyl-7,8-dihydronaphthalenes as human melanin-concentrating hormone 
receptor 1 antagonists.

Kamata M(1), Yamashita T, Imaeda T, Tanaka T, Terauchi J, Miyamoto M, Ora T, 
Tawada M, Endo S, Takekawa S, Asami A, Suzuki N, Nagisa Y, Nakano Y, Watanabe K, 
Ogino H, Kato K, Kato K, Ishihara Y.

Author information:
(1)Pharmaceutical Research Division, Takeda Pharmaceutical Company Limited, 
17-85 Jusohonmachi, 2-Chome, Yodogawa-ku, Osaka 532-8686, Japan. 
Kamata_Makoto@takeda.co.jp

Human melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (hMCHR1) antagonists are 
promising targets for obesity treatment. We identified the tetrahydronaphthalene 
derivative 1a with modest binding affinity for hMCHR1 by screening an in-house G 
protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) ligand library. We synthesized a series of 
6-aminomethyl-5,6,7,8-tetrahydronaphthalenes and evaluated their activity as 
hMCHR1 antagonists. Modification of the biphenylcarbonylamino group revealed 
that the biphenyl moiety played a crucial role in the interaction of the 
antagonist with the receptor. The stereoselective effect of the chiral center on 
binding affinity generated the novel 6-aminomethyl-7,8-dihydronaphthalene 
scaffold without a chiral center. Optimization of the amino group led to the 
identification of a potent antagonist 2s 
(4'-fluoro-N-[6-(1-pyrrolidinylmethyl)-7,8-dihydro-2-naphthalenyl][1,1'-biphenyl]-4-carboxamide), 
which significantly inhibited the nocturnal food intake in rats after oral 
administration. Pharmacokinetic analysis confirmed that 2s had good oral 
bioavailability and brain penetrance. This antagonist appears to be a viable 
lead compound that can be used to develop a promising therapy for obesity.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmc.2011.07.038
PMID: 21856163 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
