1. Curr Drug Discov Technol. 2012 Mar;9(1):25-38. doi:
10.2174/157016312799304543.

Structural analysis of 2-piperidin-4-yl-actamide derivatives for hERG blocking 
and MCH R1 antagonistic activities.

Moorthy NS(1), Ramos MJ, Fernandes PA.

Author information:
(1)Requimte, Departamento de Quimica e Bioquimica, Universidade do Porto, Porto, 
Portugal. hari.moorthy@fc.up.pt

In the present investigation, a computational based structural analysis was 
performed on a series of 2-piperidin- 4-yl-acetamide derivatives to investigate 
the physicochemical features of the molecules responsible for the hERG blocking 
and melanin concentrating hormone receptor-1 (MCH R1) antagonistic activities. 
The QSAR models derived from MLR analysis were validated by various validation 
methods and they provided significant statistical results such as Q(2), F, 
t(test), R, predicated residual error values, etc. These significant models were 
constructed with different type of physicochemical descriptors which showed that 
the hydrophobic properties on the vdW surface of the molecules are favorable for 
both the activities (MCH R1 antagonistic and hERG blocking activities) and the 
presence of polar/electronegative groups in the molecules is detrimental for 
those activities. The presence of flexible aromatic rings in the molecules has 
favorable hERG blocking activity. The MCH R1 antagonistic activity also depends 
upon the vdW volume, shape and flexibility of the molecules. In addition, the 
presented results will guide for the optimized design of novel bioactive 
molecules with less/free of hERG blocking activities to avoid unwanted potential 
cardiotoxic side effects related with the use of these possible antiarrhythmic 
and anti-obesity agents in humans.

DOI: 10.2174/157016312799304543
PMID: 22235926 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
