1. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2012 Oct 1;179(1):78-87. doi:
10.1016/j.ygcen.2012.07.023.  Epub 2012 Aug 3.

Identification of mRNAs coding for mammalian-type melanin-concentrating hormone 
and its receptors in the scalloped hammerhead shark Sphyrna lewini.

Mizusawa K(1), Amiya N, Yamaguchi Y, Takabe S, Amano M, Breves JP, Fox BK, Grau 
EG, Hyodo S, Takahashi A.

Author information:
(1)School of Marine Biosciences, Kitasato University, 1-15-1 Kitasato, 
Sagamihara, Kanagawa 252-0373, Japan. mizusawa@kitasato-u.ac.jp

Erratum in
    Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2014 May 15;201:107.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a neuromodulator, synthesized in the 
hypothalamus, that regulates both appetite and energy homeostasis in mammals. 
MCH was initially identified in teleost fishes as a pituitary gland hormone that 
induced melanin aggregation in chromatophores in the skin; however, this 
function of MCH has not been observed in other vertebrates. Recent studies 
suggest that MCH is involved in teleost feeding behavior, spurring the 
hypothesis that the original function of MCH in early vertebrates was appetite 
regulation. The present study reports the results of cDNAs cloning encoding 
preproMCH and two MCH receptors from an elasmobranch fish, Sphyrna lewini, a 
member of Chondrichthyes, the earliest diverged class in gnathostomes. The 
putative MCH peptide is composed of 19 amino acids, similar in length to the 
mammalian MCH. Reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction revealed that MCH 
is expressed in the hypothalamus in S. lewini MCH cell bodies and fibers were 
identified by immunochemistry in the hypothalamus, but not in the pituitary 
gland, suggesting that MCH is not released via the pituitary gland into general 
circulation. MCH receptor genes mch-r1 and mch-r2 were expressed in the S. 
lewini hypothalamus, but were not found in the skin. These results indicate that 
MCH does not have a peripheral function, such as a melanin-concentrating effect, 
in the skin of S. lewini hypothalamic MCH mRNA levels were not affected by 
fasting, suggesting that feeding conditions might not affect the expression of 
MCH in the hypothalamus.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2012.07.023
PMID: 22884735 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
