1. Endocrinology. 2012 Dec;153(12):6145-54. doi: 10.1210/en.2011-1435. Epub 2012 
Sep 28.

Disruption of the melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCH1R) affects 
thyroid function.

Chung S(1), Liao XH, Di Cosmo C, Van Sande J, Wang Z, Refetoff S, Civelli O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 
92697, USA.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a peptide produced in the hypothalamus 
and the zona incerta that acts on one receptor, MCH receptor 1 (MCH1R), in 
rodents. The MCH system has been implicated in the regulation of several 
centrally directed physiological responses, including the 
hypothalamus-pituitary-thyroid axis. Yet a possible direct effect of the MCH 
system on thyroid function has not been explored in detail. We now show that 
MCH1R mRNA is expressed in thyroid follicular cells and that mice lacking MCH1R 
[MCH1R-knockout (KO)] exhibit reduced circulating iodothyronine (T(4), free 
T(4), T(3), and rT(3)) levels and high TRH and TSH when compared with wild-type 
(WT) mice. Because the TSH of MCH1R-KO mice displays a normal bioactivity, we 
hypothesize that their hypothyroidism may be caused by defective thyroid 
function. Yet expression levels of the genes important for thyroid hormones 
synthesis or secretion are not different between the MCH1R-KO and WT mice. 
However, the average thyroid follicle size of the MCH1R-KO mice is larger than 
that of WT mice and contained more free and total T(4) and T(3) than the WT 
glands, suggesting that they are sequestered in the glands. Indeed, when 
challenged with TSH, the thyroids of MCH1R-KO mice secrete lower amounts of 
T(4). Similarly, secretion of iodothyronines in the plasma upon (125)I 
administration is significantly reduced in MCH1R-KO mice. Therefore, the absence 
of MCH1R affects thyroid function by disrupting thyroid hormone secretion. To 
our knowledge, this study is the first to link the activity of the MCH system to 
the thyroid function.

DOI: 10.1210/en.2011-1435
PMCID: PMC3512057
PMID: 23024261 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
