1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2012 Dec 21;3:160. doi: 10.3389/fendo.2012.00160.
 eCollection 2012.

Peripheral injections of melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 antagonist 
S38151 decrease food intake and body weight in rodent obesity models.

Della-Zuana O(1), Audinot V, Levenez V, Ktorza A, Presse F, Nahon JL, Boutin JA.

Author information:
(1)Maladies MÃ©taboliques, Institut de Recherches SERVIER Suresnes, France.

The compound S38151 is a nanomolar antagonist that acts at the 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCH(1)). S38151 is more stable than 
its purely peptide counterpart, essentially because of the blockade of its 
N-terminus. Therefore, its action on various models of obesity was studied. 
Acute intra-cerebroventricular (i.c.v.) administration of S38151 in wild-type 
rats counteracted the effect of the stable precursor of melanin-concentrating 
hormone (MCH), NEI-MCH, in a dose-dependent manner (from 0.5 to 50 nmol/kg). In 
genetically obese Zucker fa/fa rats, daily i.c.v. administration of S38151 
induced dose-dependent (5, 10, and 20 nmol/kg) inhibition of food intake, water 
intake, and body weight gain, as well as increased motility (maximal effect 
observed at 20 nmol/kg). In Zucker fa/fa rats, intraperitoneal injection of 
S38151 (30 mg/kg) induced complete inhibition of food consumption within 1 h. 
Daily intraperitoneal injection of S38151 (10 and 30 mg/kg) into genetically 
obese ob/ob mice or diet-induced obese mice is able to limit body weight gain. 
Furthermore, S38151 administration (10 and 30 mg/kg) does not affect food 
intake, water intake, or body weight gain in MCHR1-deleted mice, demonstrating 
that its effects are linked to its interaction with MCH(1). These results 
validate MCH(1) as a target of interest in obesity. S38151 cannot progress to 
the clinical phase because it is still too poorly stable in vivo.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2012.00160
PMCID: PMC3527734
PMID: 23267345
