1. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2013 Sep;16(8):1767-80. doi: 
10.1017/S1461145713000072. Epub 2013 Mar 1.

Role of melanin-concentrating hormone in the nucleus accumbens shell in rats 
behaviourally sensitized to methamphetamine.

Sun LL(1), Zhang Y, Liu JF, Wang J, Zhu WL, Zhao LY, Xue YX, Lu L, Shi J.

Author information:
(1)National Institute on Drug Dependence, Peking University, B38 Xue Yuan Road, 
Haidian, Beijing, China.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a neuropeptide and its receptor is 
extensively expressed throughout the brain. MCH has been suggested to regulate 
the rewarding and reinforcing effects of psychostimulants by potentiating the 
dopaminergic system within the midbrain. Moreover, MCH and its receptor can 
regulate ERK activity. The present study investigated the role of MCH in the 
nucleus accumbens (NAc) in rats behaviourally sensitized to methamphetamine 
(Meth). We found that the development of Meth-induced locomotor sensitization 
was attenuated by MCH infused into the NAc shell but not core. Moreover, the 
elevation of ERK phosphorylation in the NAc shell induced by Meth was inhibited 
by locally infused MCH. Infusion of the MCH receptor 1 (MCHR1) antagonist SNAP 
94847 into the NAc shell but not core augmented the initiation of locomotor 
sensitization and amplitude of elevated phosphorylated ERK levels induced by 
Meth. The expression of Meth-induced locomotor sensitization and ERK alterations 
after 1 wk withdrawal were not affected by either MCH or SNAP 94847 infused into 
the NAc shell or core. These results indicate that MCH in the NAc shell plays a 
critical role in the development but not expression of Meth-induced locomotor 
sensitization in rats, which might be mediated by the ERK signalling pathway. 
Our study suggests that MCH might be a potential target for the treatment of 
Meth addiction.

DOI: 10.1017/S1461145713000072
PMID: 23449013 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
