1. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2013 Jul 1;188:159-65. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2013.02.020. 
Epub 2013 Mar 4.

Characterization of ciliary targeting sequence of rat melanin-concentrating 
hormone receptor 1.

Nagata A(1), Hamamoto A, Horikawa M, Yoshimura K, Takeda S, Saito Y.

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Integrated Arts and Sciences, Hiroshima University, 
Kagamiyama, Hiroshima 739-8521, Japan.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is the natural peptide ligand for MCHR1 and 
MCHR2, which belong to the G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) superfamily. The 
MCH-MCHR1 system is involved in the regulation of feeding, energy homeostasis 
and emotional processing in rodents. Recently, MCHR1 expression was discovered 
in neuronal immotile primary cilia of the central nervous system in mice. The 
cilium has an important chemosensory function in many types of cell and ciliary 
dysfunction is associated with cliopathies such as polycystic kidney disease, 
retinal dystrophy, and obesity. The targeting sequence of ciliary membrane 
proteins is thought to be unique. Although these sequences have been predicted 
in the cytoplasmic third loop and/or C-terminus of GPCRs, little is known about 
the characteristics of MCHR1. We thus explored the molecular mechanisms of MCHR1 
targeting by transiently expressing a series of MCHR1 mutants into ciliated 
hRPE1 cells and evaluated the effects of these mutations on the ciliary 
localization of the heterologous receptor. This approach demonstrated that an 
Ala-to-Gly mutation (A242G) within the third intracellular loop induced a 
significant reduction in ciliary localization of the receptor without affecting 
the ciliogenesis. In contrast, no C-terminal truncation mutant had any effect on 
ciliary localization or cilia length. This study provides a potential molecular 
link between defective cilia and clinical manifestations such as obesity.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2013.02.020
PMID: 23467069 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
