1. Sleep Med Rev. 2013 Aug;17(4):293-8. doi: 10.1016/j.smrv.2012.10.002. Epub
2013  Mar 9.

Melanin-concentrating hormone control of sleep-wake behavior.

Monti JM(1), Torterolo P, Lagos P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, School of Medicine Clinics 
Hospital, Montevideo 11600, Uruguay. jmonti@mednet.org.uy

The melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a 19 aminoacid peptide found in 
mammals predominantly in neurons located in the lateral hypothalamus and 
incerto-hypothalamic area. The biological function of MCH is mediated by two 
G-protein-coupled receptors known as MCHR1 and MCHR2, although the latter is 
expressed only in carnivores, primates and man. The MCHR1 couples to Gi, Gq and 
Go proteins, with Gi leading to the inhibition of both excitatory and inhibitory 
synaptic events. Within the central nervous system (CNS) MCH participates in a 
number of functions including sleep-wake behavior. In this respect, MCHergic 
neurons project widely throughout the CNS to brain regions involved in the 
regulation of behavioral states. MCHergic neurons are silent during wakefulness 
(W), increase their firing during slow wave sleep (SWS) and still more during 
REM sleep (REMS). Studies in knockout mice for MCH (MCH(-/-)) have shown a 
reduction in SWS and an increase of W during the light and the dark phase of the 
light-dark cycle. Moreover, in response to food deprivation a marked reduction 
in REMS time was observed in these animals. Conflicting effects on sleep 
variables have been reported in MCHR1(-/-) mice by different authors. The i.c.v. 
administration of MCH increases REMS and SWS in the rat. In addition, an 
enhancement of REMS has been described following the microinjection of the 
neuropeptide into the nucleus pontis oralis of the cat, while its infusion into 
the dorsal raphe nucleus (DR) and the basal forebrain (horizontal limb of the 
diagonal band of Broca) is followed by an increase of REMS and a reduction of W 
in the rat. Immunoneutralization of MCH in the DR augmented W and suppressed 
REMS in the rat, as did the s.c. injection of selective MCHR1 antagonists. The 
robust REMS-inducing effect of MCH is likely related to the deactivation of 
monoaminergic, orexinergic, glutamatergic, cholinergic (W-on) and GABAergic 
(REM-off) neurons involved in the generation of W and the inhibition of REMS. On 
the basis of preclinical studies, it can be proposed that selective MCHR1 
receptor agonists could constitute potential therapeutic modalities in the 
arsenal of insomnia pharmacotherapy. Due to the lack of adequate animal models, 
the role of the MCHR2 on sleep is still unknown.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.smrv.2012.10.002
PMID: 23477948 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
