1. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2013 May 15;304(10):G876-84. doi: 
10.1152/ajpgi.00305.2012. Epub 2013 Mar 28.

Anti-melanin-concentrating hormone treatment attenuates chronic experimental 
colitis and fibrosis.

Ziogas DC(1), Gras-Miralles B, Mustafa S, Geiger BM, Najarian RM, Nagel JM, 
Flier SN, Popov Y, Tseng YH, Kokkotou E.

Author information:
(1)Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Dana 501, 330 Brookline Ave., Boston, 
MA 02215, USA.

Fibrosis represents a major complication of several chronic diseases, including 
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Treatment of IBD remains a clinical challenge 
despite several recent therapeutic advances. Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) 
is a hypothalamic neuropeptide shown to regulate appetite and energy balance. 
However, accumulating evidence suggests that MCH has additional biological 
effects, including modulation of inflammation. In the present study, we examined 
the efficacy of an MCH-blocking antibody in treating established, dextran sodium 
sulfate-induced experimental colitis. Histological and molecular analysis of 
mouse tissues revealed that mice receiving anti-MCH had accelerated mucosal 
restitution and lower colonic expression of several proinflammatory cytokines, 
as well as fibrogenic genes, including COL1A1. In parallel, they spared collagen 
deposits seen in the untreated mice, suggesting attenuated fibrosis. These 
findings raised the possibility of perhaps direct effects of MCH on 
myofibroblasts. Indeed, in biopsies from patients with IBD, we demonstrate 
expression of the MCH receptor MCHR1 in α-smooth muscle actin(+) subepithelial 
cells. CCD-18Co cells, a primary human colonic myofibroblast cell line, were 
also positive for MCHR1. In these cells, MCH acted as a profibrotic modulator by 
potentiating the effects of IGF-1 and TGF-β on proliferation and collagen 
production. Thus, by virtue of combined anti-inflammatory and anti-fibrotic 
effects, blocking MCH might represent a compelling approach for treating IBD.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpgi.00305.2012
PMCID: PMC3652072
PMID: 23538494 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
