1. J Chem Inf Model. 2013 May 24;53(5):1084-99. doi: 10.1021/ci4000882. Epub 2013
 Apr 26.

Fighting obesity with a sugar-based library: discovery of novel MCH-1R 
antagonists by a new computational-VAST approach for exploration of GPCR binding 
sites.

Heifetz A(1), Barker O, Verquin G, Wimmer N, Meutermans W, Pal S, Law RJ, 
Whittaker M.

Author information:
(1)Evotec (UK), Ltd., Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxfordshire, United Kingdom. 
Alexander.Heifetz@Evotec.com

Obesity is an increasingly common disease. While antagonism of the 
melanin-concentrating hormone-1 receptor (MCH-1R) has been widely reported as a 
promising therapeutic avenue for obesity treatment, no MCH-1R antagonists have 
reached the market. Discovery and optimization of new chemical matter targeting 
MCH-1R is hindered by reduced HTS success rates and a lack of structural 
information about the MCH-1R binding site. X-ray crystallography and NMR, the 
major experimental sources of structural information, are very slow processes 
for membrane proteins and are not currently feasible for every GPCR or 
GPCR-ligand complex. This situation significantly limits the ability of these 
methods to impact the drug discovery process for GPCR targets in "real-time", 
and hence, there is an urgent need for other practical and cost-efficient 
alternatives. We present here a conceptually pioneering approach that integrates 
GPCR modeling with design, synthesis, and screening of a diverse library of 
sugar-based compounds from the VAST technology (versatile assembly on stable 
templates) to provide structural insights on the MCH-1R binding site. This 
approach creates a cost-efficient new avenue for structure-based drug discovery 
(SBDD) against GPCR targets. In our work, a primary VAST hit was used to 
construct a high-quality MCH-1R model. Following model validation, a 
structure-based virtual screen yielded a 14% hit rate and 10 novel chemotypes of 
potent MCH-1R antagonists, including EOAI3367472 (IC50 = 131 nM) and EOAI3367474 
(IC50 = 213 nM).

DOI: 10.1021/ci4000882
PMID: 23590178 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
