1. J Comp Neurol. 2013 Jul 1;521(10):2208-34. doi: 10.1002/cne.23273.

Neurochemical characterization of neurons expressing melanin-concentrating 
hormone receptor 1 in the mouse hypothalamus.

Chee MJ(1), Pissios P, Maratos-Flier E.

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a hypothalamic neuropeptide that acts via 
MCH receptor 1 (MCHR1) in the mouse. It promotes positive energy balance; thus, 
mice lacking MCH or MCHR1 are lean, hyperactive, and resistant to diet-induced 
obesity. Identifying the cellular targets of MCH is an important step to 
understanding the mechanisms underlying MCH actions. We generated the Mchr1-cre 
mouse that expresses cre recombinase driven by the MCHR1 promoter and crossed it 
with a tdTomato reporter mouse. The resulting Mchr1-cre/tdTomato progeny 
expressed easily detectable tdTomato fluorescence in MCHR1 neurons, which were 
found throughout the olfactory system, striatum, and hypothalamus. To chemically 
identify MCH-targeted cell populations that play a role in energy balance, MCHR1 
hypothalamic neurons were characterized by colabeling select hypothalamic 
neuropeptides with tdTomato fluorescence. TdTomato fluorescence colocalized with 
dynorphin, oxytocin, vasopressin, enkephalin, thyrothropin-releasing hormone, 
and corticotropin-releasing factor immunoreactive cells in the paraventricular 
nucleus. In the lateral hypothalamus, neurotensin, but neither orexin nor MCH 
neurons, expressed tdTomato. In the arcuate nucleus, both Neuropeptide Y and 
proopiomelanocortin cells expressed tdTomato. We further demonstrated that some 
of these arcuate neurons were also targets of leptin action. Interestingly, 
MCHR1 was expressed in the vast majority of leptin-sensitive proopiomelanocortin 
neurons, highlighting their importance for the orexigenic actions of MCH. Taken 
together, this study supports the use of the Mchr1-cre mouse for outlining the 
neuroanatomical distribution and neurochemical phenotype of MCHR1 neurons.

Copyright Â© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/cne.23273
PMCID: PMC3633152
PMID: 23605441 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT The authors have 
no known or potential conflict of interest to disclose.
