1. Sci Pharm. 2013 Jul 1;81(3):625-39. doi: 10.3797/scipharm.1306-02. Print 2013 
Jul-Sep.

Preparation and First Preclinical Evaluation of [(18)F]FE@SNAP: A Potential PET 
Tracer for the Melanin-Concentrating Hormone Receptor-1 (MCHR1).

Philippe C(1), Nics L, Zeilinger M, Schirmer E, Spreitzer H, Karanikas G, 
Lanzenberger R, Viernstein H, Wadsak W, Mitterhauser M.

Author information:
(1)Radiochemistry and Biomarker Development Unit, Department of Nuclear 
Medicine, Medical University of Vienna, Waehringer Guertel 18-20, 1090 Vienna, 
Austria. ; Department of Pharmaceutical Technology and Biopharmaceutics, 
University of Vienna, Althanstraße 14, 1090 Vienna, Austria.

The melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) system is a new target for the treatment 
of human disorders. Since the knowledge of the MCH system's involvement in a 
variety of pathologies (obesity, diabetes, and deregulation of metabolic 
feedback mechanism) is based on in vitro or preclinical studies, a suitable 
positron emission tomography (PET) tracer needs to be developed. We herein 
present the preparation and first preclinical evaluation of [(18)F]FE@SNAP - a 
new PET tracer for MCH receptor-1 (MCHR1). The synthesis was performed using a 
microfluidic device. Preclinical evaluation included binding affinity, plasma 
stability, plasma free fraction, stability against the cytochrome P-450 (CYP450) 
system using liver microsomes, stability against carboxyl-esterase, and methods 
to assess the penetration of the blood-brain barrier (BBB) such as logD analysis 
and immobilized artificial membrane (IAM) chromatography. Levels at 374 ± 202 
MBq [(18)F]FE@SNAP were obtained after purification. The obtained K d value of 
[(18)F]FE@SNAP was 2.9 nM. [(18)F]FE@SNAP evinced high stability against 
carboxylesterase, CYP450 enzymes, and in human plasma. LogD (3.83) and IAM 
chromatography results (Pm=0.51) were in the same range as for known 
BBB-penetrating compounds. The synthesis of [(18)F]FE@SNAP was reliable and 
successful. Due to high binding affinity and stability, [(18)F]FE@SNAP is a 
promising tracer for MCHR1.

DOI: 10.3797/scipharm.1306-02
PMCID: PMC3791928
PMID: 24106662
