1. Endocrinology. 2014 Jan;155(1):81-8. doi: 10.1210/en.2013-1738. Epub 2013 Dec 
20.

Expression of melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 2 protects against 
diet-induced obesity in male mice.

Chee MJ(1), Pissios P, Prasad D, Maratos-Flier E.

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is an orexigenic neuropeptide that is a 
ligand for two subtypes of MCH receptors, MCHR1 and MCHR2. MCHR1 is universally 
expressed in mammals ranging from rodents to humans, but the expression of MCHR2 
is substantially restricted. In mammals, MCHR2 has been defined in primates as 
well as other species such as cats and dogs but is not seen in rodents. Although 
the role of MCHR1 in mediating the actions of MCH on energy balance is clearly 
defined using mouse models, the role of MCHR2 is harder to characterize because 
of its limited expression. To determine any potential role of MCHR2 in energy 
balance, we generated a transgenic MCHR1R2 mouse model, where human MCHR2 is 
coexpressed in MCHR1-expressing neurons. As shown previously, control wild-type 
mice expressing only native MCHR1 developed diet-induced obesity when fed a 
high-fat diet. In contrast, MCHR1R2 mice had lower food intake, leading to their 
resistance to diet-induced obesity. Furthermore, we showed that MCH action is 
altered in MCHR1R2 mice. MCH treatment in wild-type mice inhibited the 
activation of the immediate-early gene c-fos, and coexpression of MCHR2 reduced 
the inhibitory actions of MCHR1 on this pathway. In conclusion, we developed an 
experimental animal model that can provide insight into the action of MCHR2 in 
the central nervous system and suggest that some actions of MCHR2 oppose the 
endogenous actions of MCHR1.

DOI: 10.1210/en.2013-1738
PMCID: PMC3868808
PMID: 24169555 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
