1. BMC Genomics. 2013 Nov 13;14:784. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-784.

Genome wide analysis reveals single nucleotide polymorphisms associated with 
fatness and putative novel copy number variants in three pig breeds.

Fowler KE, Pong-Wong R, Bauer J, Clemente EJ, Reitter CP, Affara NA, Waite S, 
Walling GA, Griffin DK(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biosciences, University of Kent, Canterbury, Kent CT2 7NH, UK. 
d.k.griffin@kent.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Obesity, excess fat tissue in the body, can underlie a variety of 
medical complaints including heart disease, stroke and cancer. The pig is an 
excellent model organism for the study of various human disorders, including 
obesity, as well as being the foremost agricultural species. In order to 
identify genetic variants associated with fatness, we used a selective genomic 
approach sampling DNA from animals at the extreme ends of the fat and lean 
spectrum using estimated breeding values derived from a total population size of 
over 70,000 animals. DNA from 3 breeds (Sire Line Large White, Duroc and a white 
Pietrain composite line (Titan)) was used to interrogate the Illumina Porcine 
SNP60 Genotyping Beadchip in order to identify significant associations in terms 
of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and copy number variants (CNVs).
RESULTS: By sampling animals at each end of the fat/lean EBV (estimate breeding 
value) spectrum the whole population could be assessed using less than 300 
animals, without losing statistical power. Indeed, several significant SNPs (at 
the 5% genome wide significance level) were discovered, 4 of these linked to 
genes with ontologies that had previously been correlated with fatness (NTS, 
FABP6, SST and NR3C2). Quantitative analysis of the data identified putative CNV 
regions containing genes whose ontology suggested fatness related functions 
(MCHR1, PPARÎ±, SLC5A1 and SLC5A4).
CONCLUSIONS: Selective genotyping of EBVs at either end of the phenotypic 
spectrum proved to be a cost effective means of identifying SNPs and CNVs 
associated with fatness and with estimated major effects in a large population 
of animals.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-784
PMCID: PMC3879217
PMID: 24225222 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
