1. Int J Endocrinol. 2013;2013:143052. doi: 10.1155/2013/143052. Epub 2013 Nov
17.

Analyzing the role of receptor internalization in the regulation of 
melanin-concentrating hormone signaling.

Moden JI(1), Haude K(1), Carroll R(1), Goodspeed A(1), Cook LB(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, 217 Lennon Hall, The College at Brockport, State 
University of New York, 350 New Campus Drive, Brockport, NY 14420, USA.

The regulation of appetite is complex, though our understanding of the process 
is improving. The potential role for the melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) 
signaling pathway in the treatment of obesity is being explored by many. It was 
hypothesized that internalization of MCH receptors would act to potently 
desensitize cells to MCH. Despite potent desensitization of ERK signaling by MCH 
in BHK-570 cells, we were unable to observe MCH-mediated internalization of MCH 
receptor 1 (MCHR1) by fluorescence microscopy. A more quantitative approach 
using a cell-based ELISA indicated only 15% of receptors internalized, which is 
much lower than that reported in the literature. When β-arrestins were 
overexpressed in our system, removal of receptors from the cell surface was 
facilitated and signaling to a leptin promoter was diminished, suggesting that 
internalization of MCHR1 is sensitive to cellular β-arrestin levels. A 
dominant-negative GRK construct completely inhibited loss of receptors from the 
cell surface in response to MCH, suggesting that the internalization observed is 
phosphorylation-dependent. Since desensitization of MCH-mediated ERK signaling 
did not correlate with significant loss of MCHR1 from the cell surface, we 
hypothesize that in this model system regulation of MCH signaling may be the 
result of segregation of receptors from signaling components at the plasma 
membrane.

DOI: 10.1155/2013/143052
PMCID: PMC3855962
PMID: 24348551
