1. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2013;2013:145925. doi:
10.1155/2013/145925.  Epub 2013 Nov 14.

Effect of Nelumbo nucifera Petal Extracts on Lipase, Adipogenesis, Adipolysis, 
and Central Receptors of Obesity.

Velusami CC(1), Agarwal A(2), Mookambeswaran V(3).

Author information:
(1)R&D Centre, Natural Remedies Pvt. Ltd., Plot No. 5B, Veerasandra Industrial 
Area, 19th K.M. Stone, Hosur Road, Bangalore, Karnataka 560100, India ; Center 
for Bioseparation Technology, VIT University, Vellore, Tamil Nadu 632014, India.
(2)R&D Centre, Natural Remedies Pvt. Ltd., Plot No. 5B, Veerasandra Industrial 
Area, 19th K.M. Stone, Hosur Road, Bangalore, Karnataka 560100, India.
(3)Center for Bioseparation Technology, VIT University, Vellore, Tamil Nadu 
632014, India.

N. nucifera is one among the important medicinal plants assessed for its 
antiobesity action in various preclinical models. The present study was aimed at 
investigating the antiobesity effect of methanol and successive water extracts 
of petals of N. nucifera by studying its effect on adipogenesis, adipolysis, 
lipase, serotonin (5-HT2C), cannabinoid (CNR2), melanocyte concentrating hormone 
(MCHR1), and melanocortin (MC4R) receptors. Both methanol and successive water 
extracts of N. nucifera petals had an effect on inhibition of lipid storage in 
adipocytes and on increasing lipolysis. N. nucifera petal methanol extract 
exhibited the concentration-dependent inhibitory effect on lipase activity with 
an IC50 value of 47 µg/mL. N. nucifera petal extracts showed evident agonist and 
antagonist activity towards 5-HT2C and CNR2 receptors, respectively, while it 
showed no effect towards MCHR1 and MC4R receptors. Overall, methanol extract of 
N. nucifera petals showed better activity than successive water extract.

DOI: 10.1155/2013/145925
PMCID: PMC3848046
PMID: 24348689
