1. Behav Brain Res. 2014 Apr 1;262:14-20. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2013.12.052. Epub
2014  Jan 8.

Amphetamine reward in food restricted mice lacking the melanin-concentrating 
hormone receptor-1.

Geuzaine A(1), Tyhon A(1), Grisar T(2), Brabant C(1), Lakaye B(3), Tirelli E(1).

Author information:
(1)Département de Psychologie, Cognition et Comportement, University of Liège, 
B-4000 Liège, Belgium.
(2)GIGA-Neurosciences, University of Liège, B-4000 Liège, Belgium.
(3)GIGA-Neurosciences, University of Liège, B-4000 Liège, Belgium. Electronic 
address: B.Lakaye@ulg.ac.be.

Chronic food restriction (FR) and maintenance of low body weight have long been 
known to increase the rewarding and motor-activating effects of addictive drugs. 
However, the neurobiological mechanisms through which FR potentiates drug reward 
remain largely unknown. Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) signaling could be 
one of these mechanisms since this peptide is involved in energy homeostasis and 
modulates mesolimbic dopaminergic transmission. The purpose of the present study 
was to test this hypothesis by investigating the impact of FR on amphetamine 
reward in wild-type (WT) and knockout mice lacking the melanin-concentrating 
hormone receptor-1 (MCHR1-KO). The rewarding effects of amphetamine (0.75-2.25 
mg/kg, i.p.) were measured with the conditioned place preference (CPP) 
technique. The food of the mice was restricted to maintain their body weight at 
80-85% of their free-feeding (FF) weight throughout the entire CPP experiment. 
Locomotor activity of the animals was recorded during the conditioning sessions. 
Our results show that locomotion of all the food-restricted mice treated with 
saline or amphetamine increased over the sessions whatever the genotype. On the 
place preference test, the amplitude of CPP induced by 0.75 mg/kg amphetamine 
was higher in food restricted WT mice than in free-fed WT mice and food 
restricted MCHR1-KO mice. However, FR did not affect amphetamine reward in 
MCHR1-KO mice. The present results indicate that MCH signaling could be involved 
in the ability of FR to increase amphetamine-induced CPP.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2013.12.052
PMID: 24412349 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
