1. Peptides. 2014 May;55:58-64. doi: 10.1016/j.peptides.2014.02.005. Epub 2014
Feb  18.

Inflammation-induced functional connectivity of melanin-concentrating hormone 
and IL-10.

Ziogas DC(1), Karagiannis AK(1), Geiger BM(1), Gras-Miralles B(1), Najarian 
R(1), Reizes O(2), Fitzpatrick LR(3), Kokkotou E(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, United States.
(2)Cleveland Clinic Foundation Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland, OH 44195, 
United States.
(3)Penn State College of Medicine, Hershey, PA 17036, United States.
(4)Division of Gastroenterology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, United States. Electronic address: 
ekokkoto@bidmc.harvard.edu.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) was identified in mammals as a hypothalamic 
neuropeptide regulating appetite and energy balance. However, similarly to most 
of the brain peptides, MCH is also produced in the gastrointestinal system and 
can act locally as an immunomodulator. We have previously reported high 
expression of MCH and its receptor MCHR1 in the affected mucosa of patients with 
inflammatory bowel disease. Furthermore, MCH deficiency in mice attenuated 
experimental colitis, pointing to MCH as a mediator of intestinal inflammation. 
In the present study, in order to gain further insights into the underlying 
mechanisms of such effects of MCH, we treated mice with established experimental 
colitis due to IL-10 deficiency with a MCHR1 antagonist (DABA-822). While 
treatment with the same drug was successful in attenuating TNBS-induced colitis 
in previous studies, it offered no benefit to the IL-10 knockout mouse model, 
suggesting that perhaps IL-10 is a downstream target of MCH. Indeed, in 
experiments focusing on monocytes, we found that treatment with MCH inhibited 
LPS-mediated IL-10 upregulation. Conversely, in the same cells, exogenous IL-10 
prevented LPS-induced MCHR1 expression. Taken together, these findings indicate 
a functional cross-talk between MCH and IL-10 which prevents resolution of 
inflammation.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.peptides.2014.02.005
PMCID: PMC4004662
PMID: 24556508 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Leo R. Fitzpatrick has been 
the recipient of a Research Grant from, and Ofer Reizes has been a former 
employee of Procter and Gamble Pharmaceuticals that developed the MCHR1 
antagonist DABA-822.The rest of the authors declare no conflict of interest.
