1. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2015 Feb 1;212:114-23. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2014.03.005. 
Epub 2014 Mar 21.

Molecular cloning, expression, and signaling pathway of four 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptors from Xenopus tropicalis.

Kobayashi Y(1), Hamamoto A(1), Hirayama T(1), Saito Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Integrated Arts and Sciences, Hiroshima University, 
Higashi-hiroshima, Hiroshima 739-8521, Japan.
(2)Graduate School of Integrated Arts and Sciences, Hiroshima University, 
Higashi-hiroshima, Hiroshima 739-8521, Japan. Electronic address: 
yumist@hiroshima-u.ac.jp.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) mainly regulates feeding in mammals and 
pigmentation in teleosts. It acts via two G-protein-coupled receptors, MCH 
receptor 1 (MCHR1) and MCHR2. Although many studies exploring the MCH system in 
teleosts and mammals have been carried out, studies on other organisms are 
limited. In this study, we cloned and characterized four MCHR subtypes from the 
diploid species Xenopus tropicalis (X-MCHRs; X-MCHR1a, R1b, R2a, and R2b). 
According to a phylogenetic tree of the X-MCHRs, X-MCHR1a and R2a are close to 
mammalian MCHRs, while X-MCHR1b and R2b are close to teleostean MCHRs. We 
previously reported that the G-protein coupling capacity of the MCHR subtypes 
differed between mammals (R1: Gαi/o and Gαq; R2: Gαq) and teleosts (R1: Gαq; R2: 
Gαi/o and Gαq) in mammalian cell-based assays. By using Ca(2+) mobilization 
assays with pertussis toxin in CHO dhfr(-) cells, we found that X-MCHR1a 
promiscuously coupled to both Gαi/o and Gαq, while X-MCHR1b and R2a exclusively 
coupled to Gαq. However, no Ca(2+) influx was detected in cells transfected with 
X-MCHR2b. Reverse transcription-PCR showed that the X-MCHR mRNAs were expressed 
in various tissues. In particular, both X-MCHR1b and R2b were exclusively found 
in melanophores of the dorsal skin. In skin pigment migration assays, 
melanophores were weakly aggregated at low concentrations but dispersed at high 
concentrations of MCH, suggesting possible interactions between X-MCHR1b and R2b 
for the regulation of body color. These findings demonstrate that X. tropicalis 
has four characteristic MCHRs and will be useful for elucidating the nature of 
MCHR evolution among vertebrates.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2014.03.005
PMID: 24662390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
