1. Eur J Pharmacol. 2014 Jul 15;735:177-83. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2014.04.020.
Epub  2014 Apr 26.

Comparative autoradiographic in vitro investigation of melanin concentrating 
hormone receptor 1 ligands in the central nervous system.

Philippe C(1), Haeusler D(2), Fuchshuber F(1), Spreitzer H(3), Viernstein H(4), 
Hacker M(2), Wadsak W(2), Mitterhauser M(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Imaging and Image-guided Therapy, Divison of Nuclear 
Medicine, Radiopharmacy and Experimental Nuclear Medicine, Medical University of 
Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria; Department of Pharmaceutical Technology and 
Biopharmaceutics, University of Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria.
(2)Department of Biomedical Imaging and Image-guided Therapy, Divison of Nuclear 
Medicine, Radiopharmacy and Experimental Nuclear Medicine, Medical University of 
Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria.
(3)Department of Drug and Natural Product Synthesis, University of Vienna, 1090 
Vienna, Austria.
(4)Department of Pharmaceutical Technology and Biopharmaceutics, University of 
Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria.
(5)Department of Biomedical Imaging and Image-guided Therapy, Divison of Nuclear 
Medicine, Radiopharmacy and Experimental Nuclear Medicine, Medical University of 
Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria; Department of Pharmaceutical Technology and 
Biopharmaceutics, University of Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria. Electronic 
address: markus.mitterhauser@meduniwien.ac.at.

The MCHR1 is an interesting pharmacological and pharmaceutical target, due to 
its involvement in pathologies as diabetes, gut inflammation and adiposity. in 
vivo PET-studies of the MCHR1 in energy homeostasis and diabetes could be of 
great value for deeper understanding of endocrinological hormone status and 
consequential pharmacological interactions. Furthermore, PET-tracers would 
facilitate compound dose selection of MCHR1 antagonists for treatment. 
Therefore, we developed two potential PET-tracers, [(11)C]SNAP-7941 and 
[(18)F]FE@SNAP, for the in vivo visualization of this receptor. Aim of this 
study was a preclinical in vitro evaluation of both unlabeled ligands. 
Therefore, a comparative autoradiographic investigation on CNS (coronal rat 
brain and 4 different human brain regions) and peripheral tissues (rat tongue as 
target and rat testes as non-target region) was conducted. Competition 
experiments, using the two radioligands [(125)I]-MCH and [(125)I]-S36057, were 
performed with selective and specific MCHR1 ligands as PMC-3886, a MCHR1 
agonist, SNAP-7941 and FE@SNAP, two MCHR1 antagonists. Additionally, 
immunohistochemical staining with a specific MCHR1 antibody was performed. 
Specific binding was found in all tissues known to express the MCHR1 as human 
and rat CNS and peripheral rat tongue tissue. No specific binding was found in 
the non-target region of rat testes. MCHR1 antibody staining complemented the 
outcome of the autoradiographic experiments. The compounds SNAP-7941 and FE@SNAP 
were generally comparable with PMC-3886. Hence, the in vitro autoradiographic 
study of the unlabeled compounds SNAP-7941 and FE@SNAP further qualifies the 
potential of the PET-tracers [(11)C]SNAP-7941 and [(18)F]FE@SNAP as useful MCHR1 
PET-tracers.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2014.04.020
PMID: 24780646 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
