1. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 12;9(6):e99961. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0099961. 
eCollection 2014.

Meta-analysis of melanin-concentrating hormone signaling-deficient mice on 
behavioral and metabolic phenotypes.

Takase K(1), Kikuchi K(2), Tsuneoka Y(1), Oda S(1), Kuroda M(1), Funato H(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy, Toho University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Information Science, Faculty of Science, Toho University, 
Chiba, Japan.
(3)Department of Anatomy, Toho University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan; 
International Institutes for Integrative Sleep Medicine, University of Tsukuba, 
Ibaraki, Japan.

The demand for meta-analyses in basic biomedical research has been increasing 
because the phenotyping of genetically modified mice does not always produce 
consistent results. Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) has been reported to be 
involved in a variety of behaviors that include feeding, body-weight regulation, 
anxiety, sleep, and reward behavior. However, the reported behavioral and 
metabolic characteristics of MCH signaling-deficient mice, such as MCH-deficient 
mice and MCH receptor 1 (MCHR1)-deficient mice, are not consistent with each 
other. In the present study, we performed a meta-analysis of the published data 
related to MCH-deficient and MCHR1-deficient mice to obtain robust conclusions 
about the role of MCH signaling. Overall, the meta-analysis revealed that the 
deletion of MCH signaling enhanced wakefulness, locomotor activity, aggression, 
and male sexual behavior and that MCH signaling deficiency suppressed non-REM 
sleep, anxiety, responses to novelty, startle responses, and conditioned place 
preferences. In contrast to the acute orexigenic effect of MCH, MCH signaling 
deficiency significantly increased food intake. Overall, the meta-analysis also 
revealed that the deletion of MCH signaling suppressed the body weight, fat 
mass, and plasma leptin, while MCH signaling deficiency increased the body 
temperature, oxygen consumption, heart rate, and mean arterial pressure. The 
lean phenotype of the MCH signaling-deficient mice was also confirmed in 
separate meta-analyses that were specific to sex and background strain (i.e., 
C57BL/6 and 129Sv). MCH signaling deficiency caused a weak anxiolytic effect as 
assessed with the elevated plus maze and the open field test but also caused a 
weak anxiogenic effect as assessed with the emergence test. MCH 
signaling-deficient mice also exhibited increased plasma corticosterone under 
non-stressed conditions, which suggests enhanced activity of the 
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. To the best of our knowledge, the present 
work is the first study to systematically compare the effects of MCH signaling 
on behavioral and metabolic phenotypes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0099961
PMCID: PMC4055708
PMID: 24924345 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: This work was partly 
supported by the Research Grant from Nestle Nutrition Council Japan to HF. This 
does not alter the authorsâ€™ adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and 
materials.
