1. J Comp Neurol. 2014 Dec 1;522(17):3817-33. doi: 10.1002/cne.23642. Epub 2014
Jul  17.

Identification of neuropeptide receptors expressed by melanin-concentrating 
hormone neurons.

Parks GS(1), Wang L, Wang Z, Civelli O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of California Irvine, Irvine, 
California, 92697; Department of Developmental and Cell Biology, University of 
California Irvine, Irvine, California, 92697.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a 19-amino-acid cyclic neuropeptide that 
acts in rodents via the MCH receptor 1 (MCHR1) to regulate a wide variety of 
physiological functions. MCH is produced by a distinct population of neurons 
located in the lateral hypothalamus (LH) and zona incerta (ZI), but MCHR1 mRNA 
is widely expressed throughout the brain. The physiological responses and 
behaviors regulated by the MCH system have been investigated, but less is known 
about how MCH neurons are regulated. The effects of most classical 
neurotransmitters on MCH neurons have been studied, but those of most 
neuropeptides are poorly understood. To gain insight into how neuropeptides 
regulate the MCH system, we investigated which neuropeptide receptors are 
expressed by MCH neurons by using double in situ hybridization. In all, 20 
receptors, selected based on either a suspected interaction with the MCH system 
or demonstrated high expression levels in the LH and ZI, were tested to 
determine whether they are expressed by MCH neurons. Overall, 11 neuropeptide 
receptors were found to exhibit significant colocalization with MCH neurons: 
nociceptin/orphanin FQ opioid receptor (NOP), MCHR1, both orexin receptors 
(ORX), somatostatin receptors 1 and 2 (SSTR1, SSTR2), kisspeptin recepotor 
(KissR1), neurotensin receptor 1 (NTSR1), neuropeptide S receptor (NPSR), 
cholecystokinin receptor A (CCKAR), and the κ-opioid receptor (KOR). Among these 
receptors, six have never before been linked to the MCH system. Surprisingly, 
several receptors thought to regulate MCH neurons displayed minimal 
colocalization with MCH, suggesting that they may not directly regulate the MCH 
system.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/cne.23642
PMCID: PMC4167928
PMID: 24978951 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
