1. Behav Pharmacol. 2014 Aug;25(4):316-24. doi: 10.1097/FBP.0000000000000056.

Prodepressive effect induced by microinjections of MCH into the dorsal raphe: 
time course, dose dependence, effects on anxiety-related behaviors, and 
reversion by nortriptyline.

Urbanavicius J(1), Lagos P, Torterolo P, Scorza C.

Author information:
(1)aLaboratory of Cell Biology bDepartment of Experimental Neuropharmacology, 
Instituto de Investigaciones Biol√≥gicas Clemente Estable cDepartment of 
Physiology, Facultad de Medicina, Montevideo, Uruguay.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) administered within the rat dorsal raphe 
nucleus (DRN) has been shown to elicit prodepressive behaviors in the 
forced-swim test. The present study was designed to evaluate the time course (30 
and 60 min) and dose dependence (25-100 ng) of this effect, and whether it would 
be antagonized by an intra-DRN microinjection of the MCH-1 receptor antagonist 
ATC0175 (ATC, 1 mmol/l) or intraperitoneal pretreatment with the noradrenergic 
antidepressant nortriptyline (20 mg/kg). The results showed that the behavioral 
effect of MCH was time and dose dependent as immobility was increased, and 
climbing decreased, only by the 50 ng MCH dose at T30. The effect was mediated 
by MCH-1 receptors as a significant blockade of this behavioral response was 
observed in ATC-pretreated animals. ATC did not by itself modify animal 
behavior. Nortriptyline also prevented the prodepressive-like effect of MCH. 
Concomitantly, the effect of MCH (50 ng) at T30 on anxiety-related behaviors was 
assessed using the elevated plus-maze. Interestingly, these behaviors were 
unchanged. In conclusion, MCH administration within the DRN elicits, through the 
MCH-1 receptor, a depression-related behavior that is not accompanied by changes 
in anxiety and that is prevented by a noradrenergic antidepressant.

DOI: 10.1097/FBP.0000000000000056
PMID: 25006977 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
