1. Int J Mol Sci. 2014 Sep 1;15(9):15475-502. doi: 10.3390/ijms150915475.

Profiling the interaction mechanism of quinoline/quinazoline derivatives as 
MCHR1 antagonists: an in silico method.

Wu M(1), Li Y(2), Fu X(3), Wang J(4), Zhang S(5), Yang L(6).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Industrial Ecology and Environmental Engineering (MOE), 
Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116024, China. audi.lg@163.com.
(2)Key Laboratory of Industrial Ecology and Environmental Engineering (MOE), 
Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116024, China. yanli@dlut.edu.cn.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Fine Chemicals, Dalian University of Technology, 
Dalian 116024, China. fuxinmei@dlut.edu.cn.
(4)Key Laboratory of Industrial Ecology and Environmental Engineering (MOE), 
Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116024, China. jhwang_dlut@163.com.
(5)Key Laboratory of Industrial Ecology and Environmental Engineering (MOE), 
Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116024, China. zswei@dlut.edu.cn.
(6)Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Resource Discovery, Dalian Institute of Chemical 
Physics, Graduate School of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian 116023, 
China. yling@dicp.ac.cn.

Melanin concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1), a crucial regulator of energy 
homeostasis involved in the control of feeding and energy metabolism, is a 
promising target for treatment of obesity. In the present work, the up-to-date 
largest set of 181 quinoline/quinazoline derivatives as MCHR1 antagonists was 
subjected to both ligand- and receptor-based three-dimensional quantitative 
structure-activity (3D-QSAR) analysis applying comparative molecular field 
analysis (CoMFA) and comparative molecular similarity indices analysis (CoMSIA). 
The optimal predictable CoMSIA model exhibited significant validity with the 
cross-validated correlation coefficient (Q²) = 0.509, non-cross-validated 
correlation coefficient (R²(ncv)) = 0.841 and the predicted correlation 
coefficient (R²(pred)) = 0.745. In addition, docking studies and molecular 
dynamics (MD) simulations were carried out for further elucidation of the 
binding modes of MCHR1 antagonists. MD simulations in both water and lipid 
bilayer systems were performed. We hope that the obtained models and information 
may help to provide an insight into the interaction mechanism of MCHR1 
antagonists and facilitate the design and optimization of novel antagonists as 
anti-obesity agents.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms150915475
PMCID: PMC4200842
PMID: 25257526 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
