1. J Chem Inf Model. 2015 Jan 26;55(1):1-18. doi: 10.1021/ci500542e. Epub 2015
Jan  13.

Novel Scaffold FingerPrint (SFP): applications in scaffold hopping and 
scaffold-based selection of diverse compounds.

Rabal O(1), Amr FI, Oyarzabal J.

Author information:
(1)Small Molecule Discovery Platform, Molecular Therapeutics Program, Center for 
Applied Medical Research (CIMA), University of Navarra , Avda. Pio XII 55, 
E-31008 Pamplona, Spain.

A novel 2D Scaffold FingerPrint (SFP) for mining ring fragments is presented. 
The rings are described not only by their topology, shape, and pharmacophoric 
features (hydrogen-bond acceptors and donors, their relative locations, sp3 
carbons, and chirality) but also by the position and nature of their growing 
vectors because they play a critical role from the drug discovery perspective. 
SFP can be used (i) to identify alternative chemotypes to a reference ring 
either in a visual mode or by running quantitative similarity searches and (ii) 
in chemotype-based diversity selections. Two retrospective case studies focused 
on melanin concentrating hormone 1-receptor antagonists (MCH-R1) and 
phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors (PDE5) demonstrate the capability of this method 
for identifying novel structurally different and synthetically accessible 
chemotypes. Good enrichment factor (155 and 219) and recall values (46% and 73%) 
are found within the first 100 ranked hits (0.3% of screened database). Our 2D 
SFP descriptor outperforms well-validated current gold-standard 2D fingerprints 
(ECFP_6) and 3D approaches based on shape and electrostatic similarity. 
Scaffold-based selection of diverse compounds has a critical impact on corporate 
library design and compound acquisitions; thus, a novel strategy is introduced 
that uses diverse scaffold selections using this SFP descriptor combined with 
R-group selection at the different substitution sites. Both approaches are 
available as part of an interactive web-based application that requires minimal 
input and no computational knowledge by medicinal chemists.

DOI: 10.1021/ci500542e
PMID: 25558803 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
