1. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2015 Aug;135:154-68. doi: 10.1016/j.pbb.2015.05.018. 
Epub 2015 Jun 2.

Antidepressant/anxiolytic potential and adverse effect liabilities of 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 antagonists in animal models.

Chaki S(1), Shimazaki T(2), Nishiguchi M(2), Funakoshi T(2), Iijima M(2), Ito 
A(2), Kanuma K(2), Sekiguchi Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Taisho Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., 1-403 Yoshino-cho, Kita-ku, Saitama, Saitama 
331-9530, Japan. Electronic address: s-chaki@so.taisho.co.jp.
(2)Taisho Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., 1-403 Yoshino-cho, Kita-ku, Saitama, Saitama 
331-9530, Japan.

Melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCH1 receptor) is known to be involved 
in the control of mood and stress, in addition to the regulation of feeding. 
Here, we report further evidence that the blockade of the MCH1 receptor exhibits 
antidepressant and anxiolytic-like effects in a variety of animal models using 
TASP0382650 and TASP0489838, newly synthesized MCH1 receptor antagonists, with 
different scaffolds. Both TASP0382650 and TASP0489838 exhibited high affinities 
for human MCH1 receptor with IC50 values of 7.13 and 3.80nM, respectively. Both 
compounds showed potent antagonist activities at the MCH1 receptor, as assessed 
using MCH-increased [(35)S]GTPγS binding to human MCH1 receptor and an 
MCH-induced [Ca(2+)]i assay in rat MCH1 receptor expressing cells. In contrast, 
neither TASP0382650 nor TASP0489838 showed an affinity for the MCH2 receptor, 
another MCH receptor subtype. The oral administration of TASP0382650 or 
TASP0489838 significantly reduced the immobility time during the forced swimming 
test in rats, and reduced hyperemotionality induced by an olfactory bulbectomy, 
both of which are indicative of an antidepressant-like potential. In the 
olfactory bulbectomy model, the antidepressant effect of TASP0382650 appeared 
following a single administration, suggesting a faster onset of action, compared 
with current medications. Moreover, both TASP0382650 and TASP0489838 exhibited 
anxiolytic effects in several animal models of anxiety. In contrast, both 
TASP0382650 and TASP0489838 did not affect spontaneous locomotor activity, motor 
function, spatial memory during the Morris water maze task, or the convulsion 
threshold to pentylenetetrazole. These findings provide additional evidence that 
the blockade of the MCH1 receptor exhibits antidepressant- and anxiolytic 
activities with no adverse effects in experimental animal models.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pbb.2015.05.018
PMID: 26044968 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
