1. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2015 Aug 15;25(16):3270-4. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2015.05.074. Epub 2015 May 30.

Design, synthesis and evaluation of MCH receptor 1 antagonists--Part II: 
Optimization of pyridazines toward reduced phospholipidosis and hERG inhibition.

Roth GJ(1), Heckel A(2), Kley JT(2), Lehmann T(2), Müller SG(2), Oost T(2), 
Rudolf K(2), Arndt K(3), Budzinski R(3), Lenter M(3), Lotz RR(4), Schindler 
M(3), Thomas L(3), Stenkamp D(2).

Author information:
(1)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Department of Medicinal Chemistry, 
Research Germany, Birkendorfer Str. 65, 88397 Biberach an der Riss, Germany. 
Electronic address: geraldroth@boehringer-ingelheim.com.
(2)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Department of Medicinal Chemistry, 
Research Germany, Birkendorfer Str. 65, 88397 Biberach an der Riss, Germany.
(3)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Department of Cardiometabolic 
Research, Research Germany, Birkendorfer Str. 65, 88397 Biberach an der Riss, 
Germany.
(4)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Department of Drug Discovery 
Support, Research Germany, Birkendorfer Str. 65, 88397 Biberach an der Riss, 
Germany.

Despite recent success there remains a high therapeutic need for the development 
of drugs targeting diseases associated with the metabolic syndrome. As part of 
our search for safe and effective MCH-R1 antagonists for the treatment of 
obesity, a series of 3,6-disubstituted pyridazines was evaluated. During 
optimization several issues of the initial lead structures had to be resolved, 
such as selectivity over related GPCRs, inhibition of the hERG channel as well 
as the potential to induce phospholipidosis. Utilizing property-based design, we 
could demonstrate that all parameters can significantly be improved by 
consequently increasing the polarity of the compounds. By this strategy, we 
succeeded in identifying potent and orally available MCH-R1 antagonists with 
good selectivity over M1 and 5-HT2A and an improved safety profile with respect 
to hERG inhibition and phospholipidosis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2015.05.074
PMID: 26077492 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
