1. Cell Signal. 2016 Jun;28(6):572-84. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2016.02.018. Epub 
2016 Mar 2.

Modulation of primary cilia length by melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1.

Hamamoto A(1), Yamato S(1), Katoh Y(2), Nakayama K(2), Yoshimura K(3), Takeda 
S(3), Kobayashi Y(1), Saito Y(4).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Integrated Arts and Sciences, Hiroshima University, 
Hiroshima 739-8521, Japan.
(2)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8501, 
Japan.
(3)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Interdisciplinary Graduate School of 
Medicine and Engineering, University of Yamanashi, Yamanashi 409-3898, Japan.
(4)Graduate School of Integrated Arts and Sciences, Hiroshima University, 
Hiroshima 739-8521, Japan. Electronic address: yumist@hiroshima-u.ac.jp.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) receptor 1 (MCHR1) is a class A 
G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR). The MCH-MCHR1 system has been implicated in 
the regulation of feeding, emotional processing, and sleep in rodents. Recent 
work revealed that MCHR1 is selectively expressed in neuronal primary cilia of 
the central nervous system. Cilia have various chemosensory functions in many 
types of cell, and ciliary dysfunction is associated with ciliopathies such as 
polycystic kidney disease and obesity. Although dynamic modulation of neuronal 
cilia length is observed in obese mice, the functional interaction of neuronal 
ciliary GPCR and its endogenous ligand has not yet been elucidated. We report 
here that MCH treatment significantly reduced cilia length in hTERT-RPE1 cells 
(hRPE1 cells) transfected with MCHR1. Quantitative analyses indicated that 
MCH-induced cilia shortening progressed in a dose-dependent manner with an EC50 
lower than 1nM when cells were treated for 6h. Although the assembly and 
disassembly of primary cilia are tightly coupled to the cell cycle, cell cycle 
reentry was not a determinant of MCH-induced cilia shortening. We confirmed that 
MCH elicited receptor internalization, Ca(2+) mobilization, ERK and Akt 
phosphorylation, and inhibition of cyclic AMP accumulation in MCHR1-expressing 
hRPE1 cells. Among these diverse pathways, we revealed that Gi/o-dependent Akt 
phosphorylation was an important component in the initial stage of MCH-induced 
cilia length shortening. Furthermore, induction of fewer cilia by Kif3A siRNA 
treatment significantly decreased the MCH-mediated phosphorylation of Akt, 
indicating the functional importance of the MCHR1-Akt pathway in primary cilia. 
Taken together, the present data suggest that the MCH-MCHR1 axis may modulate 
the sensitivity of cells to external environments by controlling the cilia 
length. Therefore, further characterization of MCHR1 as a ciliary GPCR will 
provide a potential molecular mechanism to link cilia length control with 
obesity.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2016.02.018
PMID: 26946173 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
