1. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2016 Nov;26(11):1826-1835. doi: 
10.1016/j.euroneuro.2016.08.014. Epub 2016 Sep 9.

Inactivation of the melanin concentrating hormone system impairs maternal 
behavior.

Alachkar A(1), Alhassen L(2), Wang Z(2), Wang L(2), Onouye K(2), Sanathara N(2), 
Civelli O(3).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of California, 
369 Med Surge II, Irvine, CA 92697-4625, United States. Electronic address: 
aalachka@uci.edu.
(2)Departments of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of California, 
369 Med Surge II, Irvine, CA 92697-4625, United States.
(3)Departments of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of California, 
369 Med Surge II, Irvine, CA 92697-4625, United States; Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
School of Medicine, University of California, 369 Med Surge II, Irvine, CA 
92697-4625, United States; Developmental and Cell Biology, School of Medicine, 
University of California, 369 Med Surge II, Irvine, CA 92697-4625, United 
States.

In order to prepare the mother for the demands of pregnancy and lactation, the 
maternal brain is subjected to a number of adaptations. Maternal behaviors are 
regulated by complex neuronal interactions. Here, we show that the melanin 
concentrating hormone (MCH) system is an important regulator of maternal 
behaviors. First, we report that melanin concentrating hormone receptor 1 
knockout (MCHR1 KO) mice display a disruption of maternal behavior. Early 
postpartum MCHR1 KO females exhibit poor nesting, deficits in pup retrieval and 
maternal aggression. In addition, ablation of MCH receptors results in decreased 
milk production and prolactin mRNA levels. Then we show that these results are 
in line with those obtained in wild type mice (WT) treated with the specific 
MCHR1 antagonist GW803430. Furthermore, following pups retrieval, MCHR1 KO mice 
display a lower level of Fos expression than WT mice in the ventral tegmental 
area, and nucleus accumbens. With the progression of the lactation period, 
however, the MCHR1 KO mice improve maternal care towards their pups. This is 
manifested by an increase in the pups׳ survival rate and the decrease in pups׳ 
retrieval time beyond the second day after parturition. In conclusion, we show 
that the MCH system plays a significant role in the initiation of maternal 
behavior. In this context, MCH may play a role in integrating information from 
multiple sources, and connecting brain reward, homeostatic and regulatory 
systems.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. and ECNP. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.euroneuro.2016.08.014
PMCID: PMC5929110
PMID: 27617778 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest None.
