1. Behav Brain Res. 2017 Jan 1;316:271-278. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2016.09.028. Epub 
2016 Sep 12.

Consequences of constitutive deletion of melanin-concentrating hormone-1 
receptors for feeding and foraging behaviors of mice.

Eiler WJ 2nd(1), Chen Y(2), Slieker LJ(2), Ardayfio PA(1), Statnick MA(2), 
Witkin JM(3).

Author information:
(1)Divisions of Neuroscience, Lilly Research Laboratories, Eli Lilly and 
Company, Indianapolis, IN, 46285, United States.
(2)Endocrinology, Lilly Research Laboratories, Eli Lilly and Company, 
Indianapolis, IN, 46285, United States.
(3)Divisions of Neuroscience, Lilly Research Laboratories, Eli Lilly and 
Company, Indianapolis, IN, 46285, United States. Electronic address: 
jwitkin@lilly.com.

In order to decipher the functional involvement of melanin-concentrating hormone 
1 (MCH1) receptors in the control of feeding and foraging behaviors, mice with 
constitutive deletion of MCH1 receptors MCH1R -/- or knockout (KO) were studied 
and compared to age-matched littermate control mice (MCH1R +/+ or wildtype 
(WT)). Several challenges to food-motivated behaviors of food-restricted WT and 
KO mice were implemented. There were no differences between genotypes in the 
acquisition of a nose-poke response that produced food or in a discrimination 
between a response that produced food and one that did not. There were also no 
genotype differences in the rate of extinction of a food-motivated response. 
However, during the first day of extinction, foraging behaviors were increased 
significantly more in KO than in WT mice. Likewise, when the response 
requirement to obtain food was progressively increased, KO mice made 
significantly more food-directed responses than WT mice. Although adulteration 
of food with quinine did not suppress food-directed behavior in either genotype 
when the mice were food-restricted, manipulation of the degree of 
food-deprivation resulted in suppression of behavior of WT mice without 
suppressing the behavior of KO mice. Although response-produced foot shock 
suppressed food-maintained responding of both WT and KO mice, equipotent levels 
of shock (based upon psychophysical thresholds) suppressed behavior of WT mice 
without suppressing behavior of the KO mice. Finally, under a Vogel conflict 
procedure, KO mice had significantly higher levels of both punished and 
non-punished food maintained responding. Thus, the data from challenges with 
both appetitive and noxious stimulus challenges support the conclusion that mice 
with constitutive deletion of MCH1Rs have increased food seeking motivation that 
is coincident with their higher metabolism. The data also highlight important 
differences in the biological impact of MCH1 receptor KO and MCH1 receptor 
antagonism.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2016.09.028
PMID: 27633558 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
