1. Toxicol Sci. 2017 Feb;155(2):379-388. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfw216. Epub 2016
Oct  20.

Mechanisms for Hepatobiliary Toxicity in Rats Treated with an Antagonist of 
Melanin Concentrating Hormone Receptor 1 (MCHR1).

Otieno MA, Bhaskaran V(1), Janovitz E, Callejas Y, Foster WB, Washburn W, Megill 
JR, Lehman-McKeeman L, Gemzik B.

Author information:
(1)Discovery Toxicology, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Princeton, New Jersey 08543 
vasanthi.bhaskaran@bms.com.

The objective of this work was to investigate the mechanisms of hepatobiliary 
toxicity caused by thienopyrimidone MCHR1 antagonists using BMS-773174 as a tool 
molecule. Co-administration of the pan CYP inhibitor 1-aminobenzotriazole with 
BMS-773174 prevented hepatobiliary damage, and direct delivery of the diol 
metabolite BMS-769750 caused hepatobiliary toxicity, identifying the diol and 
possibly its downstream hydroxyacid (BMS-800754) metabolite as the toxic 
species. Rat liver gene expression revealed treatment-related changes in hepatic 
transporters and induction of oval cell-specific genes including deleted 
malignant tumor 1 (Dmbt1). The metabolites did not alter hepatic transporter 
activities, suggesting that transporter-mediated cholestasis was not involved. 
Because injury to biliary epithelium can result in adaptive hyperplasia, rat 
biliary epithelial cells (BECs) were isolated and exposed to the oxidative 
metabolites. BMS-769750 was cytotoxic to BECs, but not rat hepatocytes, 
suggesting a role of the diol in biliary epithelial injury. BMS-800754 was 
cytotoxic to rat hepatocytes therefore its contribution to hepatocyte injury in 
rats is a possibility. Induction of Dmbt1 in rat BECs was investigated because 
of its role in hepatic progenitor cell differentiation/proliferation during 
injury. Dmbt1 mRNA was induced by BMS-769750, but not BMS-800754 in BECs; this 
induction and cellular injury was confirmed with diol metabolites formed by 
other compounds with the same hepatobiliary liability. In conclusion, 
hepatobiliary injury by thienopyrimidinone MCHR1 antagonists was driven through 
a CYP-mediated bioactivation pathway. Induction of Dmbt1 mRNA coupled with 
cellular injury suggests that injury of biliary epithelium may be the first step 
toward an adaptive proliferative response causing BDH by these compounds.

Â© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
of Toxicology. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/toxsci/kfw216
PMID: 28025230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
