1. Hepatology. 2017 Aug;66(2):449-465. doi: 10.1002/hep.29117. Epub 2017 May 16.

Characterization of ferroptosis in murine models of hemochromatosis.

Wang H(1), An P(1), Xie E(1), Wu Q(1), Fang X(1), Gao H(1), Zhang Z(1), Li Y(1), 
Wang X(1), Zhang J(1), Li G(1), Yang L(1), Liu W(2), Min J(1), Wang F(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Public Health, Zhengzhou University; School of Public Health, The 
First Affiliated Hospital, Institute of Translational Medicine, Collaborative 
Innovation Center for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, School of 
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Program in Molecular and 
Cell Biology, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.

Ferroptosis is a recently identified iron-dependent form of nonapoptotic cell 
death implicated in brain, kidney, and heart pathology. However, the biological 
roles of iron and iron metabolism in ferroptosis remain poorly understood. Here, 
we studied the functional role of iron and iron metabolism in the pathogenesis 
of ferroptosis. We found that ferric citrate potently induces ferroptosis in 
murine primary hepatocytes and bone marrow-derived macrophages. Next, we 
screened for ferroptosis in mice fed a high-iron diet and in mouse models of 
hereditary hemochromatosis with iron overload. We found that ferroptosis 
occurred in mice fed a high-iron diet and in two knockout mouse lines that 
develop severe iron overload (Hjv-/- and Smad4Alb/Alb mice) but not in a third 
line that develops only mild iron overload (Hfe-/- mice). Moreover, we found 
that iron overload-induced liver damage was rescued by the ferroptosis inhibitor 
ferrostatin-1. To identify the genes involved in iron-induced ferroptosis, we 
performed microarray analyses of iron-treated bone marrow-derived macrophages. 
Interestingly, solute carrier family 7, member 11 (Slc7a11), a known 
ferroptosis-related gene, was significantly up-regulated in iron-treated cells 
compared with untreated cells. However, genetically deleting Slc7a11 expression 
was not sufficient to induce ferroptosis in mice. Next, we studied iron-treated 
hepatocytes and bone marrow-derived macrophages isolated from Slc7a11-/- mice 
fed a high-iron diet.
CONCLUSION: We found that iron treatment induced ferroptosis in Slc7a11-/- 
cells, indicating that deleting Slc7a11 facilitates the onset of ferroptosis 
specifically under high-iron conditions; these results provide compelling 
evidence that iron plays a key role in triggering Slc7a11-mediated ferroptosis 
and suggest that ferroptosis may be a promising target for treating 
hemochromatosis-related tissue damage. (Hepatology 2017;66:449-465).

Â© 2017 The Authors. Hepatology published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc., on behalf 
of the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.29117
PMCID: PMC5573904
PMID: 28195347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
