1. Am J Clin Nutr. 2017 Apr;105(4):991-1000. doi: 10.3945/ajcn.116.143164. Epub 
2017 Mar 8.

Impact of polyunsaturated and saturated fat overfeeding on the DNA-methylation 
pattern in human adipose tissue: a randomized controlled trial.

Perfilyev A(1), Dahlman I(2), Gillberg L(3), Rosqvist F(4), Iggman D(4), Volkov 
P(1), Nilsson E(1), Risérus U(4), Ling C(5).

Author information:
(1)Epigenetics and Diabetes Unit, Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund 
University Diabetes Center, Lund University, Clinical Research Center, Malmö, 
Sweden.
(2)Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University 
Hospital, Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Diabetes and Metabolism, Department of Endocrinology, Rigshospitalet, 
Copenhagen, Denmark; and.
(4)Clinical Nutrition and Metabolism, Department of Public Health and Caring 
Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(5)Epigenetics and Diabetes Unit, Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund 
University Diabetes Center, Lund University, Clinical Research Center, Malmö, 
Sweden; charlotte.ling@med.lu.se.

Erratum in
    Am J Clin Nutr. 2017 Jul;106(1):325.

Background: Dietary fat composition can affect ectopic lipid accumulation and, 
thereby, insulin resistance. Diets that are high in saturated fatty acids (SFAs) 
or polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) have different metabolic 
responses.Objective: We investigated whether the epigenome of human adipose 
tissue is affected differently by dietary fat composition and general 
overfeeding in a randomized trial.Design: We studied the effects of 7 wk of 
excessive SFA (n = 17) or PUFA (n = 14) intake (+750 kcal/d) on the DNA 
methylation of ∼450,000 sites in human subcutaneous adipose tissue. Both diets 
resulted in similar body weight increases. We also combined the data from the 2 
groups to examine the overall effect of overfeeding on the DNA methylation in 
adipose tissue.Results: The DNA methylation of 4875 Cytosine-phosphate-guanine 
(CpG) sites was affected differently between the 2 diets. Furthermore, both the 
SFA and PUFA diets increased the mean degree of DNA methylation in adipose 
tissue, particularly in promoter regions. However, although the mean methylation 
was changed in 1797 genes [e.g., alpha-ketoglutarate dependent dioxygenase 
(FTO), interleukin 6 (IL6), insulin receptor (INSR), neuronal growth regulator 1 
(NEGR1), and proopiomelanocortin (POMC)] by PUFAs, only 125 genes [e.g., 
adiponectin, C1Q and collagen domain containing (ADIPOQ)] were changed by SFA 
overfeeding. In addition, the SFA diet significantly altered the expression of 
28 transcripts [e.g., acyl-CoA oxidase 1 (ACOX1) and FAT atypical cadherin 1 
(FAT1)], whereas the PUFA diet did not significantly affect gene expression. 
When the data from the 2 diet groups were combined, the mean methylation of 1444 
genes, including fatty acid binding protein 1 (FABP1), fatty acid binding 
protein 2 (FABP2), melanocortin 2 receptor (MC2R), MC3R, PPARG coactivator 1 α 
(PPARGC1A), and tumor necrosis factor (TNF), was changed in adipose tissue by 
overfeeding. Moreover, the baseline DNA methylation of 12 CpG sites that was 
annotated to 9 genes [e.g., mitogen-activated protein kinase 7 (MAPK7), melanin 
concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1), and splicing factor SWAP homolog 
(SFRS8)] was associated with the degree of weight increase in response to extra 
energy intake.Conclusions: SFA overfeeding and PUFA overfeeding induce distinct 
epigenetic changes in human adipose tissue. In addition, we present data that 
suggest that baseline DNA methylation can predict weight increase in response to 
overfeeding in humans. This trial was registered at clinicaltrials.gov as 
NCT01427140.

© 2017 American Society for Nutrition.

DOI: 10.3945/ajcn.116.143164
PMID: 28275132 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
