1. Gene. 2017 Jun 5;615:57-67. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2017.03.009. Epub 2017 Mar 11.

Characterization of melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) and its receptor in 
chickens: Tissue expression, functional analysis, and fasting-induced 
up-regulation of hypothalamic MCH expression.

Cui L(1), Lv C(1), Zhang J(1), Mo C(1), Lin D(1), Li J(1), Wang Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Key laboratory of Bio-resources and Eco-environment of Ministry of Education, 
College of Life Sciences, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610064, PR China.
(2)Key laboratory of Bio-resources and Eco-environment of Ministry of Education, 
College of Life Sciences, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610064, PR China. 
Electronic address: cdwyjhk@gmail.com.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a neuropeptide expressed in the brain and 
exerts its actions through interaction with the two known G protein-coupled 
receptors, namely melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 and 2 (MCHR1 and 
MCHR2) in mammals. However, the information regarding the expression and 
functionality of MCH and MCHR(s) remains largely unknown in birds. In this 
study, using RT-PCR and RACE PCR, we amplified and cloned a MCHR1-like receptor, 
which is named cMCHR4 according to its evolutionary origin, and a MCHR2 from 
chicken brain. The cloned cMCHR4 was predicted to encode a receptor of 367 amino 
acids, which shares high amino acid identities with MCHR4 of ducks (90%), 
western painted turtles (85%), and coelacanths (77%), and a comparatively low 
identity to human MCHR1 (58%) and MCHR2 (38%), whereas chicken MCHR2 encodes a 
putative C-terminally truncated receptor and is likely a pseudogene. Using 
cell-based luciferase reporter assays or Western blot, we further demonstrated 
that chicken (and duck) MCHR4 could be potently activated by chicken MCH1-19, 
and its activation can elevate calcium concentration and activate MAPK/ERK and 
cAMP/PKA signaling pathways, indicating an important role of MCHR4 in mediating 
MCH actions in birds. Quantitative real-time PCR revealed that both cMCH and 
cMCHR4 mRNA are expressed in various brain regions including the hypothalamus, 
and cMCH expression in the hypothalamus of 3-week-old chicks could be induced by 
36-h fasting, indicating that cMCH expression is correlated with energy balance. 
Taken together, characterization of chicken MCH and MCHR4 will aid to uncover 
the conserved roles of MCH across vertebrates.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2017.03.009
PMID: 28300612 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
