1. CPT Pharmacometrics Syst Pharmacol. 2017 Jul;6(7):458-468. doi: 
10.1002/psp4.12199. Epub 2017 May 27.

Translational Modeling to Guide Study Design and Dose Choice in Obesity 
Exemplified by AZD1979, a Melanin-concentrating Hormone Receptor 1 Antagonist.

Gennemark P(1), Trägårdh M(1)(2), Lindén D(1), Ploj K(1), Johansson A(1), 
Turnbull A(1), Carlsson B(1), Antonsson M(1).

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular and Metabolic Diseases, Innovative Medicines and Early 
Development Biotech Unit, AstraZeneca, Mölndal, Sweden.
(2)University of Warwick, School of Engineering, Coventry, UK.

In this study, we present the translational modeling used in the discovery of 
AZD1979, a melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHr1) antagonist aimed for 
treatment of obesity. The model quantitatively connects the relevant biomarkers 
and thereby closes the scaling path from rodent to man, as well as from dose to 
effect level. The complexity of individual modeling steps depends on the quality 
and quantity of data as well as the prior information; from semimechanistic 
body-composition models to standard linear regression. Key predictions are 
obtained by standard forward simulation (e.g., predicting effect from exposure), 
as well as non-parametric input estimation (e.g., predicting energy intake from 
longitudinal body-weight data), across species. The work illustrates how 
modeling integrates data from several species, fills critical gaps between 
biomarkers, and supports experimental design and human dose-prediction. We 
believe this approach can be of general interest for translation in the obesity 
field, and might inspire translational reasoning more broadly.

© 2017 The Authors CPT: Pharmacometrics & Systems Pharmacology published by 
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of American Society for Clinical Pharmacology 
and Therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1002/psp4.12199
PMCID: PMC5529746
PMID: 28556607 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
