1. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2017 Nov 1;253:44-52. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2017.08.021. 
Epub 2017 Aug 23.

Cytoskeleton-related regulation of primary cilia shortening mediated by 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1.

Tomoshige S(1), Kobayashi Y(1), Hosoba K(2), Hamamoto A(3), Miyamoto T(2), Saito 
Y(4).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Integrated Arts and Sciences, Hiroshima University, 
Hiroshima 739-8521, Japan.
(2)Department of Genetics and Cell Biology, Research Institute for Radiation 
Biology and Medicine, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima 734-8553, Japan.
(3)Molecular Genetics, Institute of Life Science, Kurume University, Fukuoka 
839-0864, Japan.
(4)Graduate School of Integrated Arts and Sciences, Hiroshima University, 
Hiroshima 739-8521, Japan. Electronic address: yumist@hiroshima-u.ac.jp.

Primary cilia are specialized microtubule-based organelles. Their importance is 
highlighted by the gamut of ciliary diseases associated with various syndromes 
including diabetes and obesity. Primary cilia serve as signaling hubs through 
selective interactions with ion channels and conventional G-protein-coupled 
receptors (GPCRs). Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) receptor 1 (MCHR1), a key 
regulator of feeding, is selectively expressed in neuronal primary cilia in 
distinct regions of the mouse brain. We previously found that MCH acts on 
ciliary MCHR1 and induces cilia shortening through a Gi/o-dependent Akt pathway 
with no cell cycle progression. Many factors can participate in cilia length 
control. However, the mechanisms for how these molecules are relocated and 
coordinated to activate cilia shortening are poorly understood. In the present 
study, we investigated the role of cytoskeletal dynamics in regulating 
MCH-induced cilia shortening using clonal MCHR1-expressing hTERT-RPE1 cells. 
Pharmacological and biochemical approaches showed that cilia shortening mediated 
by MCH was associated with increased soluble cytosolic tubulin without changing 
the total tubulin amount. Enhanced F-actin fiber intensity was also observed in 
MCH-treated cells. The actions of various pharmacological agents revealed that 
coordinated actin machinery, especially actin polymerization, was required for 
MCHR1-mediated cilia shortening. A recent report indicated the existence of 
actin-regulated machinery for cilia shortening through GPCR agonist-dependent 
ectosome release. However, our live-cell imaging experiments showed that MCH 
progressively elicited cilia shortening without exclusion of 
fluorescence-positive material from the tip. Short cilia phenotypes have been 
associated with various metabolic disorders. Thus, the present findings may 
contribute toward better understanding of how the cytoskeleton is involved in 
the GPCR ligand-triggered cilia shortening with cell mechanical properties that 
underlies clinical manifestations such as obesity.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2017.08.021
PMID: 28842217 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
