1. Neuropharmacology. 2018 Jan;128:22-32. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2017.09.008. 
Epub 2017 Sep 6.

Melanin concentrating hormone modulates oxytocin-mediated marble burying.

Sanathara NM(1), Garau C(2), Alachkar A(1), Wang L(1), Wang Z(1), Nishimori 
K(3), Xu X(4), Civelli O(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of California, Irvine, CA, 92697, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of California, Irvine, CA, 
92697, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, Graduate School of Agricultural 
Science, Tohoku University, 1-1 Tsutsumidori-Amamiyamachi, Aoba-ku, Sendai, 
Miyagi, 981-8555, Japan.
(4)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, University of California, Irvine, CA, 
92697, USA.
(5)Department of Pharmacology, University of California, Irvine, CA, 92697, USA; 
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of California, Irvine, CA, 
92697, USA; Department of Developmental and Cell Biology, University of 
California, Irvine, CA, 92697, USA. Electronic address: ocivelli@uci.edu.

Repetitive and perseverative behaviors are common features of a number of 
neuropsychiatric diseases such as Angelman's syndrome, Tourette's syndrome, 
obsessive-compulsive disorder, and autism spectrum disorders. The oxytocin 
system has been linked to the regulation of repetitive behavior in both animal 
models and humans, but many of its downstream targets have still to be found. We 
report that the melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) system is a target of the 
oxytocin system in regulating one repetitive behavior, marble burying. First we 
report that nearly 60% of MCH neurons express oxytocin receptors, and 
demonstrate using rabies mediated tract tracing that MCH neurons receive direct 
presynaptic input from oxytocin neurons. Then we show that MCH receptor knockout 
(MCHR1KO) mice and MCH ablated animals display increased marble burying response 
while central MCH infusion decreases it. Finally, we demonstrate the downstream 
role of the MCH system on oxytocin mediated marble burying by showing that 
central infusions of MCH and oxytocin alone or together reduce it while 
antagonizing the MCH system blocks oxytocin-mediated reduction of this behavior. 
Our findings reveal a novel role for the MCH system as a mediator of the role of 
oxytocin in regulating marble-burying behavior in mice.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2017.09.008
PMCID: PMC5830107
PMID: 28888943 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Funding and disclosure The authors declare no 
conflict of interest.
