1. Peptides. 2018 Jun;104:50-61. doi: 10.1016/j.peptides.2018.04.009. Epub 2018
Apr  20.

Distribution of MCH-containing fibers in the feline brainstem: Relevance for REM 
sleep regulation.

Costa A(1), Castro-Zaballa S(1), Lagos P(1), Chase MH(2), Torterolo P(3).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Fisiología, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de la 
República, Uruguay.
(2)WebSciences International and UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles, USA.
(3)Departamento de Fisiología, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de la 
República, Uruguay. Electronic address: ptortero@fmed.edu.uy.

Neurons that utilize melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) as a neuromodulator are 
localized in the postero-lateral hypothalamus and incerto-hypothalamic area. 
These neurons project diffusely throughout the central nervous system and have 
been implicated in critical physiological processes, such as sleep. Unlike 
rodents, in the order carnivora as well as in humans, MCH exerts its biological 
functions through two receptors: MCHR-1 and MCHR-2. Hence, the cat is an optimal 
animal to model MCHergic functions in humans. In the present study, we examined 
the distribution of MCH-positive fibers in the brainstem of the cat. MCHergic 
axons with distinctive varicosities and boutons were heterogeneously 
distributed, exhibiting different densities in distinct regions of the 
brainstem. High density of MCHergic fibers was found in the dorsal raphe 
nucleus, the laterodorsal tegmental nucleus, the periaqueductal gray, the 
pendunculopontine tegmental nucleus, the locus coeruleus and the prepositus 
hypoglossi. Because these areas are involved in the control of REM sleep, the 
present anatomical data support the role of this neuropeptidergic system in the 
control of this behavioral state.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.peptides.2018.04.009
PMID: 29680268 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
