1. Neuroscience. 2018 Jul 15;383:160-169. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroscience.2018.05.005.  Epub 2018 May 18.

Depression-resistant Phenotype in Mice Overexpressing Regulator of G Protein 
Signaling 8 (RGS8).

Kobayashi Y(1), Takemoto R(1), Yamato S(1), Okada T(1), Iijima M(2), Uematsu 
Y(2), Chaki S(2), Saito Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Integrated Arts and Sciences, Hiroshima University, 
Hiroshima 739-8521, Japan.
(2)Research Headquarters, Taisho Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd., Saitama 331-9530, 
Japan.
(3)Graduate School of Integrated Arts and Sciences, Hiroshima University, 
Hiroshima 739-8521, Japan. Electronic address: yumist@hiroshima-u.ac.jp.

Regulator of G protein signaling (RGS) proteins are negative regulators of 
heterotrimeric G proteins that act by accelerating Gα-mediated GTPase activity 
to terminate G protein-coupled receptor-associated signaling. RGS8 is expressed 
in several brain regions involved with movement and mood. To investigate the 
role of RGS8 in vivo, we generated transgenic mice overexpressing brain RGS8 
(RGS8tg). RGS8 gene and protein expressions were examined by real-time PCR and 
immunohistochemistry, respectively, and a significant increase in RGS8 protein 
was detected in the hippocampal CA1 region compared with wild-type mice (WT). We 
characterized the phenotypic traits, and found that RGS8tg showed decreased 
depressive-like behavior in the forced swimming test (FST). Previously, RGS8 was 
identified as a potent negative regulator of melanin-concentrating hormone 
receptor 1 (MCHR1), whose activation is mainly involved in energy homeostasis 
and emotional processing. Interestingly, acute oral administration of MCHR1 
antagonist SNAP94847 did not have antidepressant-like effects on RGS8tg in the 
FST, but did show antidepressant effects on WT. In contrast, selective 
noradrenaline reuptake inhibitor desipramine had a significant effect on RGS8tg 
in the FST. MCHR1 is enriched in a subset of primary cilia, as sensory 
organelles that mediate extracellular signaling. Immunohistochemical analyses 
revealed significant elongation of MCHR1-positive cilia in the CA1 region of 
RGS8tg compared with WT. Taken together, these findings suggest that RGS8 
participates in modulation of depression-like behavior through ciliary MCHR1 
expressed in the CA1 region. The present study may support the possible 
modulation of RGS8 function in mood disorders.

Copyright © 2018 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2018.05.005
PMID: 29758252 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
