1. Genesis. 2018 Aug;56(8):e23217. doi: 10.1002/dvg.23217.

A CreER mouse to study melanin concentrating hormone signaling in the developing 
brain.

Engle SE(1), Antonellis PJ(1), Whitehouse LS(1), Bansal R(1), Emond MR(2), 
Jontes JD(2), Kesterson RA(3), Mykytyn K(4), Berbari NF(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis, 
Indianapolis, Indiana.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, College of Medicine, Ohio State University, 
Columbus, Ohio.
(3)Department of Genetics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, 
Alabama.
(4)Department of Biological Chemistry and Pharmacology, College of Medicine, 
Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio.

The neuropeptide, melanin concentrating hormone (MCH), and its G protein-coupled 
receptor, melanin concentrating hormone receptor 1 (Mchr1), are expressed 
centrally in adult rodents. MCH signaling has been implicated in diverse 
behaviors such as feeding, sleep, anxiety, as well as addiction and reward. 
While a model utilizing the Mchr1 promoter to drive constitutive expression of 
Cre recombinase (Mchr1-Cre) exists, there is a need for an inducible Mchr1-Cre 
to determine the roles for this signaling pathway in neural development and 
adult neuronal function. Here, we generated a BAC transgenic mouse where the 
Mchr1 promotor drives expression of tamoxifen inducible CreER recombinase. Many 
aspects of the Mchr1-Cre expression pattern are recapitulated by the Mchr1-CreER 
model, though there are also notable differences. Most strikingly, compared to 
the constitutive model, the new Mchr1-CreER model shows strong expression in 
adult animals in hypothalamic brain regions involved in feeding behavior but 
diminished expression in regions involved in reward, such as the nucleus 
accumbens. The inducible Mchr1-CreER allele will help reveal the potential for 
Mchr1 signaling to impact neural development and subsequent behavioral 
phenotypes, as well as contribute to the understanding of the MCH signaling 
pathway in terminally differentiated adult neurons and the diverse behaviors 
that it influences.

Â© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/dvg.23217
PMCID: PMC6167158
PMID: 29806135 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
