1. Front Genet. 2019 Feb 12;10:75. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2019.00075. eCollection
2019.

Microscopy-Based Automated Live Cell Screening for Small Molecules That Affect 
Ciliation.

Zhang P(1)(2), Kiseleva AA(2)(3), Korobeynikov V(2)(4), Liu H(1), Einarson 
MB(2), Golemis EA(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmacy, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, China.
(2)Molecular Therapeutics Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA, 
United States.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Kazan Federal University, 
Kazan, Russia.
(4)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University, New York, NY, 
United States.

The primary monocilium, or cilium, is a single antenna-like organelle that 
protrudes from the surface of most mammalian cell types, and serves as a 
signaling hub. Mutations of cilia-associated genes result in severe genetic 
disorders termed ciliopathies. Among these, the most common is autosomal 
dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD); less common genetic diseases include 
Bardet-Biedl syndrome, Joubert syndrome, nephronophthisis, and others. Important 
signaling cascades with receptor systems localized exclusively or in part at 
cilia include Sonic Hedgehog (SHH), platelet derived growth factor alpha 
(PDGFRÎ±), WNTs, polycystins, and others. Changes in ciliation during development 
or in pathological conditions such as cancer impacts signaling by these 
proteins. Notably, ciliation status of cells is coupled closely to the cell 
cycle, with cilia protruding in quiescent (G0) or early G1 cells, declining in 
S/G2, and absent in M phase, and has been proposed to contribute to cell cycle 
regulation. Because of this complex biology, the elaborate machinery regulating 
ciliary assembly and disassembly receives input from many cellular proteins 
relevant to cell cycle control, development, and oncogenic transformation, 
making study of genetic factors and drugs influencing ciliation of high 
interest. One of the most effective tools to investigate the dynamics of the 
cilia under different conditions is the imaging of live cells. However, 
developing assays to observe the primary cilium in real time can be challenging, 
and requires a consideration of multiple details related to the cilia biology. 
With the dual goals of identifying small molecules that may have beneficial 
activity through action on human diseases, and of identifying ciliary activities 
of existing agents that are in common use or development, we here describe 
creation and evaluation of three autofluorescent cell lines derived from the 
immortalized retinal pigmented epithelium parental cell line hTERT-RPE1. These 
cell lines stably express the ciliary-targeted fluorescent proteins 
L13-Arl13bGFP, pEGFP-mSmo, and tdTomato-MCHR1-N-10. We then describe methods for 
use of these cell lines in high throughput screening of libraries of small 
molecule compounds to identify positive and negative regulators of ciliary 
disassembly.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2019.00075
PMCID: PMC6379280
PMID: 30809247
