1. Brain Res. 2019 Sep 15;1719:71-76. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2019.05.021. Epub 
2019 May 20.

The role of Olfaction in MCH-regulated spontaneous maternal responses.

Alhassen L(1), Phan A(1), Alhassen W(1), Nguyen P(1), Lo A(1), Shaharuddin H(1), 
Sanathara N(1), Civelli O(2), Alachkar A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, 369 Med Surge II, University 
of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697-4625, United States.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, 369 Med Surge II, University 
of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697-4625, United States; Department of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Medicine, 369 Med Surge II, University of 
California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697-4625, United States; Department of 
Developmental and Cell Biology, School of Medicine, 369 Med Surge II, University 
of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697-4625, United States.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Medicine, 369 Med Surge II, 
University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697-4625, United States. 
Electronic address: aalachka@uci.edu.

Melanin concentrating hormone (MCH) is involved in the initiation of maternal 
behavior during the postpartum period. Virgin females also display some aspects 
of maternal care independent of the hormonal and neurochemical changes 
associated with pregnancy and parturition. Maternal behavior in virgin females 
is triggered by pups-generated chemosensory signals. We therefore examined the 
role of MCH in maternal-related behaviors in virgin mice and whether it involves 
chemosensory mechanisms. We used mice with germline knock-out of MCH receptor 
(MCHR1 KO) and mice with conditional ablation of MCH neurons (MCH cKO) using 
Cre-inducible diphtheria toxin (iDTR) system. We report that germline deletion 
of MCHR1 and ablation of MCH neurons impair spontaneous maternal behavior that 
is induced upon pups' exposure. The latency and duration to retrieve pups by 
MCHR1 KO and MCH cKO mice are longer than their control littermate mice. In 
support of this finding, we found that in the three-chamber social test, both 
MCHR1 KO and MCH cKO mice display a lack of interest in interacting with pups. 
Strikingly, however, we found that while MCHR1 KO mice were unable to detect 
pups' chemosensory signals and displayed impairment in general olfactory 
discrimination, MCH cKO mice exhibited normal olfactory function. Our findings 
indicate that the lack of MCHR1 or of normal MCH levels causes defects in 
maternal behavior in non-sensitized virgin mice, and that disruption of the 
olfactory signaling might not count for these defects.

Copyright Â© 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2019.05.021
PMID: 31121161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
