1. Curr Biol. 2019 Jun 17;29(12):1976-1987.e4. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2019.05.009.
Epub  2019 May 30.

Dynamic REM Sleep Modulation by Ambient Temperature and the Critical Role of the 
Melanin-Concentrating Hormone System.

Komagata N(1), Latifi B(1), Rusterholz T(2), Bassetti CLA(3), Adamantidis A(4), 
Schmidt MH(5).

Author information:
(1)Bern University Hospital (Inselspital), University of Bern, 3010 Bern, 
Switzerland.
(2)Center for Experimental Neurology, Department of Neurology, Bern University 
Hospital (Inselspital), University of Bern, 3010 Bern, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Neurology, Bern University Hospital (Inselspital), University 
of Bern, Freiburgstrasse 18, 3010 Bern, Switzerland.
(4)Center for Experimental Neurology, Department of Neurology, Bern University 
Hospital (Inselspital), University of Bern, 3010 Bern, Switzerland; Department 
of Biomedical Research (DBMR), Bern University Hospital (Inselspital), 
University of Bern, 3010 Bern, Switzerland.
(5)Center for Experimental Neurology, Department of Neurology, Bern University 
Hospital (Inselspital), University of Bern, 3010 Bern, Switzerland; Department 
of Neurology, Bern University Hospital (Inselspital), University of Bern, 
Freiburgstrasse 18, 3010 Bern, Switzerland; Ohio Sleep Medicine Institute, 4975 
Bradenton Avenue, Dublin, OH 43017, USA. Electronic address: 
markus.schmidt@insel.ch.

Comment in
    Curr Biol. 2019 Jul 8;29(13):R644-R646.

Ambient temperature (Ta) warming toward the high end of the thermoneutral zone 
(TNZ) preferentially increases rapid eye movement (REM) sleep over non-REM 
(NREM) sleep across species. The control and function of this 
temperature-induced REM sleep expression have remained unknown. 
Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) neurons play an important role in REM sleep 
control. We hypothesize that the MCH system may modulate REM sleep as a function 
of Ta. Here, we show that wild-type (WT) mice dynamically increased REM sleep 
durations specifically during warm Ta pulsing within the TNZ, compared to both 
the TNZ cool and baseline constant Ta conditions, without significantly 
affecting either wake or NREM sleep durations. However, genetically engineered 
MCH receptor-1 knockout (MCHR1-KO) mice showed no significant changes in REM 
sleep as a function of Ta, even with increased sleep pressure following a 4-h 
sleep deprivation. Using MCH-cre mice transduced with channelrhodopsin, we then 
optogenetically activated MCH neurons time locked with Ta warming, showing an 
increase in REM sleep expression beyond what Ta warming in yellow fluorescent 
protein (YFP) control mice achieved. Finally, in mice transduced with 
archaerhodopsin-T, semi-chronic optogenetic MCH neuronal silencing during Ta 
warming completely blocked the increase in REM sleep seen in YFP controls. These 
data demonstrate a previously unknown role for the MCH system in the dynamic 
output expression of REM sleep during Ta manipulation. These findings are 
consistent with the energy allocation hypothesis of sleep function, suggesting 
that endotherms have evolved neural circuits to opportunistically express REM 
sleep when the need for thermoregulatory defense is minimized.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2019.05.009
PMID: 31155350 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
