1. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2019 Dec 15;29(24):126741. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2019.126741. Epub 2019 Oct 16.

Identification of a new small molecule chemotype of Melanin Concentrating 
Hormone Receptor-1 antagonists using pharmacophore-based virtual screening.

Helal MA(1), Chittiboyina AG(2), Avery MA(3).

Author information:
(1)University of Science and Technology, Biomedical Sciences Program, Zewail 
City of Science and Technology, October Gardens, 6th of October, Giza 12578, 
Egypt; Medicinal Chemistry Department, Faculty of Pharmacy, Suez Canal 
University, Ismailia 41522, Egypt. Electronic address: mhelal@zewailcity.edu.eg.
(2)National Center for Natural Products Research, School of Pharmacy, University 
of Mississippi, University, MS 38677, United States.
(3)Department of BioMolecular Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of 
Mississippi, University, MS 38677, United States.

MCH receptor is a G protein-coupled receptor with two subtypes R1 and R2. Many 
studies have demonstrated the role of MCH-R1 in feeding and energy homeostasis. 
It has been proven that oral administration of small molecule MCH-R1 antagonists 
significantly reduces food intake and causes a dose-dependent weight loss. In 
this study, two ligand-based pharmacophores were developed and validated based 
on recently published MCH-R1 antagonists with diverse structures. Successful 
pharmacophores had one hydrogen bond acceptor, one positive ionizable, one ring 
aromatic and two or three hydrophobic groups. These 3D-QSAR models were used for 
virtual screening of the ZINC chemical database resulting in the identification 
of nine compounds with more than 50% displacement of radiolabeled MCH at a 20 μM 
concentration. Moreover, four of these compounds showed antagonistic activities 
in Aequorin functional assay, including MH-3 which is the first MCH-R1 
antagonist based on a diazaspiro[4.5]decane scaffold. The most active compounds 
were also docked into our previously published MCH-R1 homology model to gain 
insights into their binding determinants. These compounds could represent a 
viable starting scaffold for the design of potent MCH-R1 antagonists with 
improved pharmacokinetic properties as an effective treatment for obesity.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2019.126741
PMID: 31678007 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
