1. Front Genet. 2020 Mar 27;11:139. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2020.00139. eCollection 
2020.

Genome-Wide Association Study Identifies Genomic Loci Associated With 
Neurotransmitter Concentration in Cattle.

Chen Q(1), Qu K(2), Ma Z(3), Zhan J(2), Zhang F(1), Shen J(1), Ning Q(1), Jia 
P(1), Zhang J(2), Chen N(1), Chen H(1), Huang B(2), Lei C(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction of Shaanxi 
Province, College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, 
Yangling, China.
(2)Yunnan Academy of Grassland and Animal Science, Kunming, China.
(3)Academy of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Qinghai University, 
Xining, China.

Abnormal neurotransmitter concentration is one of the factors that affect the 
health status, behavioral personality, and welfare level of animals, but the 
genetic basis of the abnormality is still largely unknown. The objective of this 
study is to identify putative genomic loci associated with neurotransmitter 
concentration in cattle. We measured serotonin (5HT), dopamine (DA), cortisol, 
glutamate (Glu), and ACTH concentrations in blood serum using double-antibody 
sandwich ELISA in 30 Brahman cattle and 127 Yunling cattle. Interestingly, we 
found that ACTH concentration was positively correlated with body weight, cannon 
circumference, and hip width (P < 0.05). Genome-wide association study (GWAS) 
was performed with mixed linear models using autosomal SNPs derived from the 
whole-genome sequence. We identified five, five, two, three, and five suggestive 
loci associated with 5HT, DA, cortisol, Glu, and ACTH concentration, 
respectively. These 20 associated loci implicated 18 candidate genes. For Glu 
concentration, the most significant association locus was assigned to MCHR1, a 
G-coupled receptor that could modulate glutamate release. For dopamine 
concentration, a very strong association locus was located in the intron of 
SLC18A2, which is a critical mediator of dopamine dynamics. However, for ACTH 
concentration, a very strong association locus was assigned to HTR1F, a G 
protein-coupled receptor that can influence the release of ACTH. Other candidate 
genes of interest identified for neurotransmitter concentration were PRMT6, 
GADD45A, PCCA, ANGPT1, ACCS, LOC100336971, TNR, GSDMA, CNTN3, CARMIL1, CDKAL1, 
RBFOX1, PCDH15, and LGALS12. Our findings will provide targets for the genetic 
improvement of neurotransmitter-related traits in domestic cattle and basic 
materials for studying the mechanism of neurotransmitter synthesis, release, and 
transport in human and animals.

Copyright Â© 2020 Chen, Qu, Ma, Zhan, Zhang, Shen, Ning, Jia, Zhang, Chen, Chen, 
Huang and Lei.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2020.00139
PMCID: PMC7119242
PMID: 32292413
