1. Neurochem Int. 2021 Jan;142:104902. doi: 10.1016/j.neuint.2020.104902. Epub
2020  Nov 13.

Properties of primary cilia in melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1-bearing 
hippocampal neurons in vivo and in vitro.

Kobayashi Y(1), Okada T(1), Miki D(1), Sekino Y(2), Koganezawa N(3), Shirao 
T(4), Diniz GB(5), Saito Y(6).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Integrated Sciences for Life, Hiroshima University, 1-7-1 
Kagamiyama, Higashi-Hiroshima, Hiroshima, 739-8521, Japan.
(2)Endowed Laboratory of Human Cell-Based Drug Discovery, Graduate School of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 
113-0033, Japan.
(3)Department of Neurobiology and Behavior, Graduate School of Medicine, Gunma 
University, 3-39-22 Showa-machi, Maebashi, Gunma, 371-8511, Japan.
(4)Department of Neurobiology and Behavior, Graduate School of Medicine, Gunma 
University, 3-39-22 Showa-machi, Maebashi, Gunma, 371-8511, Japan; AlzMed,Inc., 
UT South Clinical Research Building, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8485, 
Japan.
(5)Department of Neurosurgery, Yale School of Medicine, 310 Cedar St, New Haven, 
CT, 06520, USA.
(6)Graduate School of Integrated Sciences for Life, Hiroshima University, 1-7-1 
Kagamiyama, Higashi-Hiroshima, Hiroshima, 739-8521, Japan. Electronic address: 
yumist@hiroshima-u.ac.jp.

The primary cilium is a solitary organelle that organizes a sensitive signaling 
hub in a highly ordered microenvironment. Cilia are plastic structures, changing 
their length in response to bioactive substances, and ciliary length may be 
regulated to ensure efficient signaling capacity. Mammalian brain neurons 
possess primary cilia that are enriched in a set of G protein-coupled receptors 
(GPCRs), including the feeding-related melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) 
receptor 1 (MCHR1). We previously demonstrated a novel biological phenomenon, 
ciliary MCHR1-mediated cilia length shortening through Gi/o and Akt signaling, 
using a simple cell culture model of human retinal pigmented epithelial RPE1 
cells exogenously expressing MCHR1. In the present study, we characterized the 
properties of endogenous MCHR1-expressing primary cilia in hippocampal neurons 
in rodents. Using cultured dissociated rat hippocampal neurons in vitro, we 
showed that MCH triggered cilia length reduction involved in MCHR1-Gi/o and -Akt 
signaling. In rat hippocampal slice cultures with preservation of the 
cytoarchitecture and cell populations, ciliary MCHR1 was abundantly located in 
the CA1 and CA3 regions, but not in the dentate gyrus. Notably, treatment of 
slice cultures with MCH induced Gi/o- and Akt-dependent cilia shortening in the 
CA1 region without influencing cilia length in the CA3 region. Regarding the in 
vivo mouse brain, we observed higher levels of ciliary MCHR1 in the CA1 and CA3 
regions as well as in slice cultures. In the starved state mice, a marked 
increase in MCH mRNA expression was detected in the lateral hypothalamus. 
Furthermore, MCHR1-positive cilia length in the hippocampal CA1 region was 
significantly shortened in fasted mice compared with fed mice. The present 
findings focused on the hippocampus provide a potential approach to investigate 
how MCHR1-driven cilia shortening regulates neuronal activity and physiological 
function toward feeding and memory tasks.

Copyright Â© 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuint.2020.104902
PMID: 33197527 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
