1. Adv Protein Chem Struct Biol. 2021;123:241-273. doi: 
10.1016/bs.apcsb.2020.10.003. Epub 2020 Dec 4.

Network analysis of transcriptomics data for the prediction and prioritization 
of membrane-associated biomarkers for idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) by 
bioinformatics approach.

Mishra S(1), Shah MI(1), Udhaya Kumar S(2), Thirumal Kumar D(2), Gopalakrishnan 
C(2), Al-Subaie AM(3), Magesh R(4), George Priya Doss C(2), Kamaraj B(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Jaypee University of 
Information Technology, Waknaghat, Solan, Himachal Pradesh, India; Navipoint 
Health India Pvt Ltd, Moula-Ali, Hyderabad, Telangana, India.
(2)School of Biosciences and Technology, Vellore Institute of Technology, 
Vellore, Tamil Nadu, India.
(3)Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, College of Applied Medical 
Sciences, Imam Abdulrahman Bin Faisal University, Dammam, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Faculty of Biomedical Sciences, Technology & Research, Department of 
Biotechnology, Sri Ramachandra University, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India.
(5)Department of Neuroscience Technology, College of Applied Medical Sciences in 
Jubail, Imam Abdulrahman Bin Faisal University, Jubail, Saudi Arabia.

Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a rare yet crucial persistent lung 
disorder that actuates scarring of lung tissues, which makes breathing 
difficult. Smoking, environmental pollution, and certain viral infections could 
initiate lung scarring. However, the molecular mechanism involved in IPF remains 
elusive. To develop an efficient therapeutic arsenal against IPF, it is vital to 
understand the pathology and deviations in biochemical pathways that lead to 
disorder. In this study, we availed network analysis and other computational 
pipelines to delineate the prominent membrane proteins as diagnostic biomarkers 
and therapeutic targets for IPF. This study yielded a significant role of 
glycosaminoglycan binding, endothelin, and GABA-B receptor signaling pathway in 
IPF pathogenesis. Furthermore, ADCY8, CRH, FGB, GPR17, MCHR1, NMUR1, and SAA1 
genes were found to be immensely involved with IPF, and the enrichment pathway 
analysis suggests that most of the pathways were corresponding to membrane 
transport and signal transduction functionalities. This analysis could help in 
better understanding the molecular mechanism behind IPF to develop an efficient 
therapeutic target or biomarkers for IPF.

Copyright Â© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.apcsb.2020.10.003
PMID: 33485486 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
