1. Sci Rep. 2021 Mar 1;11(1):4880. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-84138-4.

Transcriptome analysis of ciliary-dependent MCH signaling in differentiating 
3T3-L1 pre-adipocytes.

Cook LB(1), Ophardt HD(2), Shen R(2), Pratt BH(2), Galbier LA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, 217 Lennon Hall, SUNY Brockport, 350 New Campus Drive, 
Brockport, NY, 14420, USA. lcook@brockport.edu.
(2)Department of Biology, 217 Lennon Hall, SUNY Brockport, 350 New Campus Drive, 
Brockport, NY, 14420, USA.

An understanding of adipocyte responsiveness to G-protein-coupled 
receptor-(GPCR) derived signals must take into consideration the role of 
membrane microenvironments; that individual sub-populations of proteins may vary 
significantly across different regions of the cell, and that cell 
differentiation alters those microenvironments. 3T3-L1 pre-adipocytes undergo a 
dramatic phenotypic transformation during differentiation into adipocytes, 
requiring the development of a transient primary cilium. We demonstrate that 
melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) receptor 1, a GPCR that stimulates appetite, 
translocates to the transient primary cilium during early 3T3-L1 cell 
adipogenesis. Furthermore, we used RNA-Seq to investigate whether MCH signaling 
is influenced by its receptor localization and whether MCH can influence the 
transcriptome of early adipocyte development. We found that MCH signaling is 
sensitive to receptor localization to cilia, and this alters the adipogenic 
transcriptional program. Also, novel MCH signaling pathways in 3T3-L1 cells are 
identified, including those for circadian rhythm, the inflammatory response, and 
ciliary biogenesis. The presence of active MCH-signaling pathways in 
pre-adipocytes and the discovery that these pathways intersect with the early 
adipogenic program, among other newly-identified signaling pathways, suggests 
that the use of MCH receptor 1 antagonists for clinical interventions may have 
unintended consequences on adipose tissue development.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-84138-4
PMCID: PMC7921120
PMID: 33649390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author(s) declare(s) the following potential 
conflict of interests regarding the publication of this article: L.B.C. is a 
paid consultant for W.W. Norton & Company; R.S. has an ARK Innovation ETF (ARKK) 
with Illumina as one of its constituents, but does not directly hold stock in 
Illumina; H.D.O. is employed as a contractor by DuPont and owns stock in 
Organovo; B.H.P. and L.A.G. have no competing interests to declare.
