1. J Neurosci. 2021 Apr 28;41(17):3932-3943. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2993-20.2021.
 Epub 2021 Mar 19.

The Transition Zone Protein AHI1 Regulates Neuronal Ciliary Trafficking of MCHR1 
and Its Downstream Signaling Pathway.

Hsiao YC(1), Muñoz-Estrada J(1), Tuz K(1), Ferland RJ(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Experimental Therapeutics, Albany Medical 
College, Albany, New York 12208.
(2)Department of Neuroscience and Experimental Therapeutics, Albany Medical 
College, Albany, New York 12208 rferland2@une.edu.
(3)Department of Neurology, Albany Medical College, Albany, New York 12208.

The Abelson-helper integration site 1 (AHI1) gene encodes for a ciliary 
transition zone localizing protein that when mutated causes the human 
ciliopathy, Joubert syndrome. We prepared and examined neuronal cultures derived 
from male and female embryonic Ahi1+/+ and Ahi1-/- mice (littermates) and found 
that the distribution of ciliary melanin-concentrating hormone receptor-1 
(MchR1) was significantly reduced in Ahi1-/- neurons; however, the total and 
surface expression of MchR1 on Ahi1-/- neurons was similar to controls 
(Ahi1+/+). This indicates that a pathway for MchR1 trafficking to the surface 
plasma membrane is intact, but the process of targeting MchR1 into cilia is 
impaired in Ahi1-deficient mouse neurons, indicating a role for Ahi1 in 
localizing MchR1 to the cilium. Mouse Ahi1-/- neurons that fail to accumulate 
MchR1 in the ciliary membrane have significant decreases in two downstream MchR1 
signaling pathways [cAMP and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (Erk)] on MCH 
stimulation. These results suggest that the ciliary localization of MchR1 is 
necessary and critical for MchR1 signaling, with Ahi1 participating in 
regulating MchR1 localization to cilia, and further supporting cilia as critical 
signaling centers in neurons.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT Our work here demonstrates 
that neuronal primary cilia are powerful and focused signaling centers for the 
G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR), melanin-concentrating hormone receptor-1 
(MCHR1), with a role for the ciliary transition zone protein, Abelson-helper 
integration site 1 (AHI1), in mediating ciliary trafficking of MCHR1. Moreover, 
our manuscript further expands the repertoire of cilia functions on neurons, a 
cell type that has not received significant attention in the cilia field. 
Lastly, our work demonstrates the significant influence of ciliary GPCR 
signaling in the overall signaling of neurons.

Copyright © 2021 the authors.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2993-20.2021
PMCID: PMC8084322
PMID: 33741721 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
