1. FASEB Bioadv. 2021 Jul 5;3(9):744-767. doi: 10.1096/fba.2021-00029.
eCollection  2021 Sep.

Ciliary GPCR-based transcriptome as a key regulator of cilia length control.

Kobayashi Y(1), Tomoshige S(1), Imakado K(1), Sekino Y(2), Koganezawa N(3), 
Shirao T(3)(4), Diniz GB(5), Miyamoto T(6), Saito Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Integrated Sciences for Life Hiroshima University 
Hiroshima Japan.
(2)Endowed Laboratory of Human Cell-Based Drug Discovery Graduate School of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences The University of Tokyo Tokyo Japan.
(3)Department of Neurobiology and Behavior Graduate School of Medicine Gunma 
University Maebashi Japan.
(4)AlzMed, Inc. Tokyo Japan.
(5)California National Primate Research Center University of California Davis CA 
USA.
(6)Department of Genetics and Cell Biology Research Institute for Radiation 
Biology and Medicine Hiroshima University Hiroshima Japan.

The primary cilium is a plasma membrane-protruding sensory organelle that 
efficiently conveys signaling cascades in a highly ordered microenvironment. Its 
signaling is mediated, in part, by a limited set of GPCRs preferentially 
enriched in the cilium membrane. This includes melanin-concentrating hormone 
(MCH) receptor 1 (MCHR1), which plays a role in feeding and mood. In addition to 
its receptor composition, the length of the cilium is a characteristic parameter 
that is implicated in its function. We previously found that MCH can dynamically 
shorten cilia length via the Gi/o and Akt pathways in both MCHR1-expressing 
hTERT-RPE1 cells (hRPE1 cells) and rat hippocampal neurons. However, the 
detailed mechanisms by which MCH regulates cilia length through ciliary MCHR1 
remains unclear. In this study, we aimed to determine the transcriptome changes 
in MCHR1-expressing hRPE1 cells in response to MCH to identify the target 
molecules involved in cilia length regulation via MCHR1 activation. RNA 
sequencing analysis of ciliated cells subjected to MCH treatment showed 
upregulation of 424 genes and downregulation of 112 genes compared with static 
control cells. Validation by quantitative real-time PCR, knocking down, and 
CRISPR/Cas9-mediated knockout technology identified a molecule, PDZ and LIM 
domain-containing protein 5 (PDLIM5). Thus, it was considered as the most 
significant key factor for MCHR1-mediated shortening of cilia length. Additional 
analyses revealed that the actin-binding protein alpha-actinin 1/4 is a crucial 
downstream target of the PDLIM5 signaling pathway that exerts an effect on 
MCHR1-induced cilia shortening. In the endogenous MCHR1-expressing hippocampus, 
transcriptional upregulation of PDLIM5 and actinin 1/4, following the 
application of MCH, was detected when the MCHR1-positive cilia were shortened. 
Together, our transcriptome study based on ciliary MCHR1 function uncovered a 
novel and important regulatory step underlying cilia length control. These 
results will potentially serve as a basis for understanding the mechanism 
underlying the development of obesity and mood disorders.

Â© 2021 The Authors. FASEB BioAdvances published by The Federation of American 
Societies for Experimental Biology.

DOI: 10.1096/fba.2021-00029
PMCID: PMC8409570
PMID: 34485842

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations of interest: T. Shirao is CEO of 
AlzMed, Inc. No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article for Y. 
Kobayashi, S. Tomoshige, K. Imakado, Y. Sekino, N. Koganezawa, T. Miyamoto, and 
Y. Saito was reported.
