1. Mol Neurobiol. 2022 Jan;59(1):245-265. doi: 10.1007/s12035-021-02511-w. Epub 
2021 Oct 19.

Regulation of Brain Primary Cilia Length by MCH Signaling: Evidence from 
Pharmacological, Genetic, Optogenetic, and Chemogenic Manipulations.

Alhassen W(1), Kobayashi Y(2), Su J(1), Robbins B(1), Nguyen H(1), Myint T(1), 
Yu M(1), Nauli SM(3), Saito Y(2), Alachkar A(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of 
California, Irvine, CA, 92697, USA.
(2)Graduate School of Integrated Sciences for Life, Hiroshima University, 1-7-1 
Kagamiyama, Higashi-Hiroshima, Hiroshima, 739-8521, Japan.
(3)Department of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, 
Chapman University, Health Science Campus, Chapman University, Irvine, CA, 
92618, USA.
(4)Departments of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of 
California, Irvine, CA, 92697, USA. aalachka@uci.edu.
(5)Institute for Genomics and Bioinformatics, School of Information and Computer 
Sciences, University of California, Irvine, CA, 92697, USA. aalachka@uci.edu.

The melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) system is involved in numerous 
functions, including energy homeostasis, food intake, sleep, stress, mood, 
aggression, reward, maternal behavior, social behavior, and cognition. In 
rodents, MCH acts on MCHR1, a G protein-coupled receptor, which is widely 
expressed in the brain and abundantly localized to neuronal primary cilia. Cilia 
act as cells' antennas and play crucial roles in cell signaling to detect and 
transduce external stimuli to regulate cell differentiation and migration. Cilia 
are highly dynamic in terms of their length and morphology; however, it is not 
known if cilia length is causally regulated by MCH system activation in vivo. In 
the current work, we examined the effects of activation and inactivation of MCH 
system on cilia lengths by using different experimental models and 
methodologies, including organotypic brain slice cultures from rat prefrontal 
cortex (PFC) and caudate-putamen (CPu), in vivo pharmacological (MCHR1 agonist 
and antagonist GW803430), germline and conditional genetic deletion of MCHR1 and 
MCH, optogenetic, and chemogenetic (designer receptors exclusively activated by 
designer drugs (DREADD)) approaches. We found that stimulation of MCH system 
either directly through MCHR1 activation or indirectly through optogenetic and 
chemogenetic-mediated excitation of MCH-neuron, caused cilia shortening, 
detected by the quantification of the presence of ADCY3 protein, a known primary 
cilia marker. In contrast, inactivation of MCH signaling through pharmacological 
MCHR1 blockade or through genetic manipulations - germline deletion of MCHR1 and 
conditional ablation of MCH neurons - induced cilia lengthening. Our study is 
the first to uncover the causal effects of the MCH system in the regulation of 
the length of brain neuronal primary cilia. These findings place MCH system at a 
unique position in the ciliary signaling in physiological and pathological 
conditions and implicate MCHR1 present at primary cilia as a potential 
therapeutic target for the treatment of pathological conditions characterized by 
impaired primary cilia function associated with the modification of its length.

Â© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12035-021-02511-w
PMCID: PMC9083846
PMID: 34665407 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
