1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Nov 22;22(22):12609. doi: 10.3390/ijms222212609.

Identification of Impacted Pathways and Transcriptomic Markers as Potential 
Mediators of Pulmonary Fibrosis in Transgenic Mice Expressing Human IGFBP5.

Nguyen XX(1), Renaud L(1), Feghali-Bostwick C(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology & Immunology, Department of Medicine, Medical 
University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425, USA.

Pulmonary fibrosis is a serious disease characterized by extracellular matrix 
(ECM) component overproduction and remodeling. Insulin-like growth 
factor-binding protein 5 (IGFBP5) is a conserved member of the IGFBP family of 
proteins that is overexpressed in fibrotic tissues and promotes fibrosis. We 
used RNA sequencing (RNAseq) to identify differentially expressed genes (DEGs) 
between primary lung fibroblasts (pFBs) of homozygous (HOMO) transgenic mice 
expressing human IGFBP5 (hIGFBP5) and wild type mice (WT). The results of the 
differential expression analysis showed 2819 DEGs in hIGFBP5 pFBs. Functional 
enrichment analysis confirmed the pro-fibrotic character of IGFBP5 and revealed 
its impact on fundamental signaling pathways, including cytokine-cytokine 
receptor interaction, focal adhesion, AGE-RAGE signaling, calcium signaling, and 
neuroactive ligand-receptor interactions, to name a few. Noticeably, 7% of the 
DEGs in hIGFBP5-expressing pFBs are receptors and integrins. Furthermore, hub 
gene analysis revealed 12 hub genes including Fpr1, Bdkrb2, Mchr1, Nmur1, Cnr2, 
P2ry14, and Ptger3. Validation assays were performed to complement the RNAseq 
data. They confirmed significant differences in the levels of the corresponding 
proteins in cultured pFBs. Our study provides new insights into the molecular 
mechanism(s) of IGFBP5-associated pulmonary fibrosis through possible receptor 
interactions that drive fibrosis and tissue remodeling.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222212609
PMCID: PMC8619832
PMID: 34830489 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors state that they have no conflict of 
interest.
