1. Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 29;12:745308. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.745308. 
eCollection 2021.

PDGF Promotes Dermal Fibroblast Activation via a Novel Mechanism Mediated by 
Signaling Through MCHR1.

Takamura N(1), Renaud L(1), da Silveira WA(2), Feghali-Bostwick C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC, 
United States.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, School of Life Sciences and Education, 
Staffordshire University, Stoke-on-Trent, United Kingdom.

Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is an autoimmune disease characterized by vasculopathy 
and excessive fibrosis of the skin and internal organs. To this day, no 
effective treatments to prevent the progression of fibrosis exist, and SSc 
patients have disabilities and reduced life expectancy. The need to better 
understand pathways that drive SSc and to find therapeutic targets is urgent. 
RNA sequencing data from SSc dermal fibroblasts suggested that 
melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1), one of the G protein-coupled 
receptors regulating emotion and energy metabolism, is abnormally deregulated in 
SSc. Platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)-BB stimulation upregulated MCHR1 mRNA 
and protein levels in normal human dermal fibroblasts (NHDF), and MCHR1 
silencing prevented the PDGF-BB-induced expression of the profibrotic factors 
transforming growth factor beta 1 (TGFβ1) and connective tissue growth factor 
(CTGF). PDGF-BB bound MCHR1 in membrane fractions of NHDF, and the binding was 
confirmed using surface plasmon resonance (SPR). MCHR1 inhibition blocked 
PDGF-BB modulation of intracellular cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP). MCHR1 
silencing in NHDF reduced PDGF-BB signaling. In summary, MCHR1 promoted the 
fibrotic response in NHDF through modulation of TGFβ1 and CTGF production, 
intracellular cAMP levels, and PDGF-BB-induced signaling pathways, suggesting 
that MCHR1 plays an important role in mediating the response to PDGF-BB and in 
the pathogenesis of SSc. Inhibition of MCHR1 should be considered as a novel 
therapeutic strategy in SSc-associated fibrosis.

Copyright © 2021 Takamura, Renaud, da Silveira and Feghali-Bostwick.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.745308
PMCID: PMC8667318
PMID: 34912333 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
