1. ChemMedChem. 2022 Apr 5;17(7):e202100707. doi: 10.1002/cmdc.202100707. Epub
2022  Feb 3.

hERG Optimization of Benzofuro-Pyridine and Pyrazino-Indole Derivatives as MCHR1 
Antagonists.

Huszár J(1), Bozó É(1), Beke G(1), Katalin Szalai K(2), Kardos P(2), Boros A(2), 
Greiner I(3), Éles J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Gedeon Richter Plc., Gyömrői út 19-21, 1103, 
Budapest, Hungary.
(2)Pharmacological and Drug Safety Research, Gedeon Richter Plc., Gyömrői út 
19-21, 1103, Budapest, Hungary.
(3)Research Directorate, Gedeon Richter Plc., Gyömrői út 19-21, 1103, Budapest, 
Hungary.

Obesity is a global epidemic associated with multiple severe diseases. Several 
pharmacotherapies have been investigated including the antagonists of melanin 
concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1). The design, synthesis, and biological 
studies of novel MCHR1 antagonists based on benzofuro-pyridine and 
pyrazino-indole scaffold was performed. We confirmed that fine-tuning 
lipophilicity and basic pKa by modifying the benzyl group and introducing 
different substituents on the aliphatic nitrogen sidechain decreases both hERG 
inhibition and metabolic clearance. We have succeeded to develop excellent 
in vitro parameters in the case of compounds 17 
(4-[(5-chloropyridin-2-yl)methoxy]-1-[4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-8-oxa-4-azatricyclo[7.4.0.02 
,7 ]trideca-1(13),2(7),9,11-tetraen-11-yl]-1,2-dihydropyridin-2-one 
monohydrochloride) and 23 g 
(4-[(5-chloropyridin-2-yl)methoxy]-1-(1,2,3,4-tetrahydropyrazino[1,2-a]indol-8-yl)pyridin-2(1H)-one 
monohydrochloride), which can be considered as valuable tools for further 
pharmacological investigation.

© 2022 Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/cmdc.202100707
PMID: 35041296 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
