1. Sleep Sci. 2021 Jul-Sep;14(3):229-235. doi: 10.5935/1984-0063.20200075.

Microinjection of melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) into the median raphe 
nucleus promotes REM sleep in rats.

Pascovich C(1), Niño S(1), Mondino A(1), Lopez-Hill X(2), Urbanavicius J(2), 
Monti J(3), Lagos P(1), Torterolo P(1).

Author information:
(1)Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de la República, Fisiología, Montevideo - 
Uruguay.
(2)Instituto de Investigaciones Biológicas Clemente Estable, Neurofarmacología 
Experimental, Montevideo - Uruguay.
(3)Hospital de Clínicas, Farmacología y Terapéutica, Montevideo - Uruguay.

Melanin concentrating hormone (MCH) is a sleep-promoting neuromodulator 
synthesized by neurons located in the postero-lateral hypothalamus and 
incerto-hypothalamic area. MCHergic neurons have widespread projections 
including the serotonergic dorsal (DR) and median (MnR) raphe nuclei, both 
involved in the control of wakefulness and sleep. In the present study, we 
explored in rats the presence of the MCH receptor type 1 (MCHR-1) in 
serotonergic neurons of the MnR by double immunofluorescence. Additionally, we 
analyzed the effect on sleep of MCH microinjections into the MnR. We found that 
MCHR-1 protein was present in MnR serotonergic and non-serotonergic neurons. In 
this respect, the receptor was localized in the primary cilia of these neurons. 
Compared with saline, microinjections of MCH into the MnR induced a dose-related 
increase in REM sleep time, which was related to a rise in the number of REM 
sleep episodes, associated with a reduction in the time spent in W. No 
signiﬁcant changes were observed in non-REM (NREM) sleep time. Our data strongly 
suggest that MCH projections towards the MnR, acting through the MCHR-1 located 
in the primary cilia, promote REM sleep.

DOI: 10.5935/1984-0063.20200075
PMCID: PMC8848522
PMID: 35186201
