1. Front Pharmacol. 2022 Aug 9;13:906057. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2022.906057. 
eCollection 2022.

Melanin-concentrating hormone promotes anxiety and intestinal dysfunction via 
basolateral amygdala in mice.

He X(1), Li Y(1), Zhang N(2), Huang J(1), Ming X(1), Guo R(1), Hu Y(3), Ji P(3), 
Guo F(1).

Author information:
(1)Pathophysiology Department, School of Basic Medicine, Qingdao University, 
Qingdao, China.
(2)Department of Clinical Laboratory, the Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao 
University, Qingdao, China.
(3)Qingdao Medical College, Qingdao University, Qingdao, China.

The limbic system plays a pivotal role in stress-induced anxiety and intestinal 
disorders, but how the functional circuits between nuclei within the limbic 
system are engaged in the processing is still unclear. In our study, the results 
of fluorescence gold retrograde tracing and fluorescence immunohistochemistry 
showed that the melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) neurons of the lateral 
hypothalamic area (LHA) projected to the basolateral amygdala (BLA). Both 
chemogenetic activation of MCH neurons and microinjection of MCH into the BLA 
induced anxiety disorder in mice, which were reversed by intra-BLA 
microinjection of MCH receptor 1 (MCHR1) blocker SNAP-94847. In the chronic 
acute combining stress (CACS) stimulated mice, SNAP94847 administrated in the 
BLA ameliorated anxiety-like behaviors and improved intestinal dysfunction via 
reducing intestinal permeability and inflammation. In conclusion, MCHergic 
circuit from the LHA to the BLA participates in the regulation of anxiety-like 
behavior in mice, and this neural pathway is related to the intestinal 
dysfunction in CACS mice by regulating intestinal permeability and inflammation.

Copyright Â© 2022 He, Li, Zhang, Huang, Ming, Guo, Hu, Ji and Guo.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2022.906057
PMCID: PMC9395614
PMID: 36016574

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
