1. Front Neurosci. 2022 Sep 13;16:952275. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2022.952275. 
eCollection 2022.

The melanin-concentrating hormone system as a target for the treatment of sleep 
disorders.

Potter LE(1)(2), Burgess CR(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, Michigan Medicine, Ann 
Arbor, MI, United States.
(2)Michigan Neuroscience Institute, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 
United States.

Given the widespread prevalence of sleep disorders and their impacts on health, 
it is critical that researchers continue to identify and evaluate novel avenues 
of treatment. Recently the melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) system has 
attracted commercial and scientific interest as a potential target of 
pharmacotherapy for sleep disorders. This interest emerges from basic scientific 
research demonstrating a role for MCH in regulating sleep, and particularly REM 
sleep. In addition to this role in sleep regulation, the MCH system and the MCH 
receptor 1 (MCHR1) have been implicated in a wide variety of other physiological 
functions and behaviors, including feeding/metabolism, reward, anxiety, 
depression, and learning. The basic research literature on sleep and the MCH 
system, and the history of MCH drug development, provide cause for both 
skepticism and cautious optimism about the prospects of MCH-targeting drugs in 
sleep disorders. Extensive efforts have focused on developing MCHR1 antagonists 
for use in obesity, however, few of these drugs have advanced to clinical 
trials, and none have gained regulatory approval. Additional basic research will 
be needed to fully characterize the MCH system's role in sleep regulation, for 
example, to fully differentiate between MCH-neuron and peptide/receptor-mediated 
functions. Additionally, a number of issues relating to drug design will 
continue to pose a practical challenge for novel pharmacotherapies targeting the 
MCH system.

Copyright Â© 2022 Potter and Burgess.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2022.952275
PMCID: PMC9513178
PMID: 36177357

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
