1. Front Psychiatry. 2023 Feb 7;14:1115924. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2023.1115924. 
eCollection 2023.

Genomic regulatory sequences in the pathogenesis of bipolar disorder.

Levchenko A(1), Plotnikova M(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Translational Biomedicine, Saint Petersburg State University, 
Saint Petersburg, Russia.
(2)Vavilov Institute of General Genetics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, 
Russia.
(3)Center for Genetics and Life Science, Sirius University of Science and 
Technology, Sochi, Russia.

The lifetime prevalence of bipolar disorder is estimated to be about 2%. 
Epigenetics defines regulatory mechanisms that determine relatively stable 
patterns of gene expression by controlling all key steps, from DNA to messenger 
RNA to protein. This Mini Review highlights recent discoveries of modified 
epigenetic control resulting from genetic variants associated with bipolar 
disorder in genome-wide association studies. The revealed epigenetic 
abnormalities implicate gene transcription and post-transcriptional regulation. 
In the light of these discoveries, the Mini Review focuses on the genes PACS1, 
MCHR1, DCLK3, HAPLN4, LMAN2L, TMEM258, GNL3, LRRC57, CACNA1C, CACNA1D, and NOVA2 
and their potential biological role in the pathogenesis of bipolar disorder. 
Molecular mechanisms under control of these genes do not translate into a 
unified picture and substantially more research is needed to fill the gaps in 
knowledge and to solve current limitations in prognosis and treatment of bipolar 
disorder. In conclusion, the genetic and functional studies confirm the complex 
nature of bipolar disorder and indicate future research directions to explore 
possible targeted treatment options, eventually working toward a personalized 
approach.

Copyright Â© 2023 Levchenko and Plotnikova.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyt.2023.1115924
PMCID: PMC9941178
PMID: 36824672

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
