1. Methods Cell Biol. 2023;175:69-83. doi: 10.1016/bs.mcb.2022.09.007. Epub 2023 
Jan 3.

Evaluation of ciliary-GPCR dynamics using a validated organotypic brain slice 
culture method.

Kobayashi Y(1), Saito Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Integrated Sciences for Life, Hiroshima University, 
Hiroshima, Japan.
(2)Graduate School of Integrated Sciences for Life, Hiroshima University, 
Hiroshima, Japan. Electronic address: yumist@hiroshima-u.ac.jp.

The primary cilium is a structural organelle present in most mammalian cells. 
Primary cilia are enriched with a unique protein repertoire distinct from that 
of the cytosol and the plasma membrane. Such a highly organized microenvironment 
creates effective machinery for translating extracellular cues into 
intracellular signals. G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are key receptors in 
sensing environmental stimuli transmitted via a second messenger into a cellular 
response. Recent data has demonstrated that a limited number of non-olfactory 
GPCRs, including melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1), are 
preferentially localized to ciliary membranes of several mammalian cell types, 
including neuronal cells. Evidence was accumulated to support the functional 
importance of ciliary-GPCR signaling accompanying ciliary structural changes 
using cilia-specific cell and molecular biology techniques. Thus, cilia are now 
considered to function as a unique sensory platform for the integration of GPCR 
signaling and various cytoplasmic domains. Dissociated neurons expressing 
ciliary-GPCRs can be a useful tool for examining ciliary dynamics. However, 
losing preexisting neuronal connectivity may alter neuronal ciliary morphology, 
such as abnormal elongation. Brain slices prepared under ex vitro conditions are 
a powerful approach that maintains the cytoarchitecture, enabling researchers to 
have accurate control over experimental conditions and to study individual cells 
from subregions of the brain. Here, we present a detailed description of our 
novel modified method for organotypic culture of rat brain slice and a validated 
immunostaining protocol to characterize ciliary-GPCR dynamics in coupling with 
neuropeptides or aminergic activation.

Copyright Â© 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.mcb.2022.09.007
PMID: 36967146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
