1. J Bioenerg Biomembr. 2023 Dec;55(6):435-446. doi: 10.1007/s10863-023-09993-4. 
Epub 2023 Nov 9.

Computational prediction of analog compounds of the membrane protein MCHR1 
antagonists ALB-127158 and KRX-104130.

Sariyer E(1), Sariyer AS(2).

Author information:
(1)Vocational School of Health Services, Medical Laboratory Techniques, Artvin 
Coruh University, Artvin, Turkey. esariyer@artvin.edu.tr.
(2)Faculty of Health Sciences, Department of Nutrition and Dietetics, Artvin 
Coruh University, Artvin, Turkey.

Obesity, which is already pervasive throughout the world, endangers public 
health by raising the prevalence of metabolic disorders and making their 
treatment more difficult. The development of drugs to treat obesity is a focus 
of effort. Melanin concentrated hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1) is the target of some 
of these therapeutic possibilities since as increased levels of melanin 
concentrated hormone have been found in obesity models. Known MCHR1 antagonists 
include BMS-830216, GW-856464, NGD-4715, ALB-127158, and AMG 076, but many have 
failed phase-I clinical studies. As a potential treatment for cardiotoxicity, 
KRX-104130 has only recently been identified. As MCH system is potentially 
effective target for treatment of obesity, in silico research into interaction 
between MCHR1 and its antagonists at molecular level was the primary goal of 
this study. Analogues ALB-127158 and KRX-104130 were screened among the 
RealEnamine library. The complexes obtained by molecular docking were embedded 
in mimics brain-cell membrane and simulated for 540 ns, and then MM-GBSA were 
calculated with MMPBSA.py. With all these computational studies, similar or 
different aspects of selected analogous compounds to ALB-127158 and KRX-104130 
were investigated. The specificity of this study was that it analyzed MCHR1 
protein as embedded in membrane. It was concluded that KRX-104130's analogue 
Z1922310273 and ALB-127158's analogue PV-002757495233 did not cause a difference 
in terms of phospholipid membrane properties. In addition, all ligands remained 
stable in putative binding site. It has been suggested that PV-002757495233 and 
Z1922310273 compounds can be evaluated as MCHR1 antagonists when all these 
outputs are considered in melting pots.

Â© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s10863-023-09993-4
PMID: 37940722 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
