1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1998 Feb 4;1401(2):216-20. doi: 
10.1016/s0167-4889(97)00135-3.

Cloning of the rat brain cDNA encoding for the SLC-1 G protein-coupled receptor 
reveals the presence of an intron in the gene.

Lakaye B(1), Minet A, Zorzi W, Grisar T.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neurochemistry University of Li√®ge, Belgium. B.Lakaye@ulg.ac.be

In order to isolate new G protein-coupled receptors expressed in the cerebral 
cortex, a set of degenerate oligonucleotides corresponding to the third and 
seventh transmembrane segment were synthetized. Their use in PCR on rat brain 
cortex mRNA amplified several cDNA fragments. One of them, a 526 bp sequence, 
encoded for what was at that time an unknown G protein-coupled receptor. An 
oligonucleotide derived from the sequence was then used as a probe to isolate 
the receptor cDNA from a rat brain cDNA library. It encodes for a 353aa protein 
with seven transmembrane segments, three consensus N-glycosylation sites at the 
amino terminus and several potential phosphorylation sites in the intracellular 
loops. This protein shares 91% overall identity with a recently cloned human 
somatostatin-like receptor of 402aa named SLC-1. This suggests that we have 
cloned the rat orthologue of the human SLC-1. However, the extracellular 
N-terminus of the human receptor is 49 amino acids longer and shows 50% identity 
with the rat one. Because the human sequence was deduced from genomic DNA, we 
suspected the presence of an intron in the gene. This was confirmed by PCR using 
primers spanning the intron. On the basis of the sequence of a 128 kb fragment 
of chromosome 22 encompassing the SLC-1 gene, we were able to deduce a corrected 
amino acids sequence for the human receptor. So both rat and human SLC-1 
receptors are 353aa long, with three consensus N-glycosylation sites. They share 
96% identity at the amino acid level and are encoded by a gene containing one 
intron in the coding sequence.

DOI: 10.1016/s0167-4889(97)00135-3
PMID: 9531978 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
