Hi Steven, 

here are my comments on version 3 (some of them you might have already
caught). The new chapter layout is much better in my opinion. I also
love the new Orcalab related photos. Glossary and Publications of this
thesis should be moved to Appendices. I will send you more comments
later today.

Abstact: 

* DONE 
In this thesis, a system that assists researchers to listen to, view,
annotate and run advanced audio feature extraction and machine
learning algorithms on them. -> a system is presented that assists
researchers ....

Chapter 1. 

* DONE 
The first and most important will be to measure the classification
accuracy of the machine learning system. -> accuracy of the various
machine learning and audio feature extraction systems we have
investigated.

* DONE 
that allows for experts in bioacoustics to upload, view, listen to and
annotate recordings -> that allows experts in bioacoustics to upload,
view, listen to, and annotate recordings

* DONE 
It will integrate a number-> it integrates a number 

* DONE 
It will enable researchers to run these audio feature extraction-> It
enables researchers (try to avoid future tense in anything but future
work)

* DONE 
for both the use of traditional grid -> for the use of traditional

* DONE 
in the Case Studies chapter and results from using the system
developed in this thesis to this dataset in the Evaluation chapter.
 -> refer to chapters by number (use the latex ref: stuff so that if
you move the chapters the numbers will get updated automatically).

* DONE 
"In recent years, the larger storage and computational capacity of
computers has in- spired researchers to analyze larger and larger
collections of bioacoustic data. Much of the historical audio
recordings are present on audio tapes, and using high-throughput audio
digitization facilities, this data has begun to be transferred to
digital form. At the University of Victoria, we have previously
described a project called the Orchive [NSST13] where we have
digitized over 20,000 hours recordings from the OrcaLab re- search
facility, stored originally on 45 minute long analog audio cassette
tapes. These recordings contain large numbers of the vocalizations of
Orcas (Orcinus orca) along with other species of marine mammals."
-> You already mention the Orchive earlier in the section. Maybe move
this paragraph and combine it with the previous mention:

(earlier  part were Orchive is introduced)

"Here at the University of Victoria, we have developed the Orchive,
one of the largest repositories of bioacoustic data in the world,
containing over 20,000 hours of recordings of orca vocalizations,
collected from OrcaLab, a land-based research station at Hanson Island
on the BC coast. The Orchive project is the primary focus in this
thesis and the project will be described in detail in the Case Studies
chapter and results from using the system developed in this thesis to
this dataset in the Evaluation chapter"

* DONE 
Figure 1.3 (the catalog) looks truncated. Also A36 is blank.


* DONE 
In several place you use analogue - I tend to prefer analog but
analogue might be also correct

* DONE 
Dr. Paul Spong provided the following quote:

-> put quotes around the quote

* DONE 
developers of bioacoustic, machine learning and music information
retrieval researchers -> (this can be parsed as developers of
researchers.)  bioacoustics and machine learning developers, and music
information retrieval researchers or probably better -> researchers
interested in bioacoustics, machine learning, and music information
retrieval

* DONE 
The primary scientific community that will receive benefits from this
archive are the developers of bioacoustic algorithms which includes
but is not exclusive to mem- bers of the machine learning and music
information retrieval communities.-> essentially repeat of previous
sentence

* DONE 
OrcaLab has been recording the vocalizations of these beings for over
40 years. In a collaboration with them, we are digitizing and
analyzing this huge and rich archive in a project we have called The
Orchive.
 -> you already have mentioned that. 

* DONE 
A brief overview of bioacoustics will be followed by a detailed review
of the literature on orca vocalizations.-> is followed by a detailed

* DONE 
sped the creation of the Orchive-> movitated the creation ? 

* DONE 
Overall I think Chapter 2 is really solid and in good shape.  A final
short section (1-2 page) summarizing the chapter and connecting to the
thesis themes would be good.

* DONE 
that they store data on tape. -> that the data is stored 

* DONE 
This study used a digital approach using a Fast Fourier Transform was
used to produce an spectrogram of short regions of audio -> in which a
Fast Fourier Transform was used to produce ...

* DONE 
and uses the recently developed FFT [CT65] -> and used the recently
developed

* DONE 
when using the naive DFT instead of O(Nlog(N)) for the FFT.
->
when using the naive DFT, instead of O(Nlog(N)) for the FFT.

* DONE 
and it was hugely relevant to the research in this thesis.
  -> and it has been hugely relevant 

* DONE 
followed by bout analysis.
  -> bout ? Ok you explain it in the next sentence. Maybe saying first 
what it is and then saying this is called bout analysis would make it flow 
better. 

* DONE 
is previously described Sidewinder algorithm,
-> is the previously 

* DONE 
DLFT-Makes
  -> the DLFT makes ... 

* DONE 
to create smooth pitch track.
  -> to create a smooth pitch track 

* DONE 
a Marsyas network
 -> I am not sure if you have mentioned Marsyas before. I suggest
having a specific subsection probably in Chapter 1 that you explain in
2-3 paragraphs marsyas and that then you can refer to in other parts
of the thesis were you mention Marsyas.

* DONE 
we considered doing feature extraction in jMIR -> add a sentence or
two very briefly outlining why you decided not to.



